APPENDIX
JLKichline
12/19/83
FOMC BRIEFING
Economic activity has been expanding at a strong rate
in the fourth quarter, with real GNP estimated to be rising
somewhat more than 6 percent at an annual rate. That rate of
growth is, of course, less than the exceptionally rapid expan-
sion during the spring and summer, and our interpretation of
recent developments and the outlook continues to point to fur-
ther deceleration early in 1984. Overall, the forecast prepared
for this meeting of the Committee does not differ significantly
from that presented at the last meeting.
In the current quarter, activity has been fueled by
strong consumer and business spending. The dollar value of total
retail sales advanced nearly 2 percent in November. Auto sales
remained at the advanced level of the month earlier owing to con-
tinued very strong demand for imported models. Sales other than
autos picked up in November, and given the abundance of reports
that this is the best Christmas season for retailers in years,
we have assumed a substantial further rise of sales during Decem-
ber.
Early next year, however, the forecast calls for a
slackening in growth of consumer spending, consistent with a
weakening of forces that presumably acted to boost spending this
year--these would include the sharp rise in the stock market and
the decline in interest rates in late 1982 and the first part of
-
2 -
this year, the mid-year tax cut, and the improved economic out-
look that helped unleash pent up demands. We expect consumer
income growth next year to be supportive of moderate gains in
consumption, although employment growth seems likely to slow
from the fast pace this year. In this connection, I might note
that the November labor market surveys again reported sizable
growth of employment, and with no expansion of the labor force
the unemployment rate registered its second consecutive large
decline. We expect the labor force to begin expanding, and
with slower growth of employment, the unemployment rate is
projected to move down slowly next year, but reach a bit lower
level than previously projected.
On business spending, the indicators of current and
future outlays have moved erratically, but on the whole they
point to further appreciable growth this quarter and into 1984.
Much of the strength of business fixed investment spending is
focused on equipment and this component of industrial production
has been rising briskly; in each of the past two months the total
industrial production index rose 3/4 percent while output of
business equipment averaged increases of nearly 1-1/2 percent
per month. Business inventory investment has been on the up-
trend and is projected to contribute to growth of activity early
-
3
next year as well; despite the turnaround in inventory invest-
ment this spring, inventory-sales ratios are still flat or declin-
ing given the surge in final sales.
Two areas of the economy acting to damp growth of activ-
ity are exports and residential construction. The persistent
high foreign exchange value of the dollar and sluggish recovery
abroad suggest exports will remain weak well into next year.
Residential construction spending has slowed considerably and
may well decline this quarter on the basis of developments through
October, even assuming some uptick in housing starts during Novem-
ber and December; housing starts data for November will be avail-
able tomorrow morning. Around current interest rates it appears
that housing market activity has about levelled out, and in fact
issuance of building permits has stabilized recently. There has
been an ample supply of mortgage money available and that supply
has been enlarged by the recent flood of mortgage revenue bonds
to beat the year-end cutoff on such financing. Overall, however,
we don't expect to see much change in housing activity over the
forecast period.
On the wage and price side of the forecast there have
not been any significant changes. If anything the most recent
news on prices has been a shade better than we might have
expected. In particular, energy prices have been coming in a
-
4 -
little lower than projected and food prices have been rising
about in line with expectations but the outlook for 1984--at
least in terms of risks--seems to be improving a bit. For the
four quarters of 1984 we have held to the forecast of the GNP
deflator increasing 4-1/2 percent, up about 1/2 percent from the
rate expected this year.
Notes for F.O.M.C. Meeting
December 20, 1983
Sam Y. Cross
The dollar has climbed steadily higher in the exchange
markets, rising over the last five weeks by 2 to 4 percent
against the European currencies, and posting its first
significant gain against the Canadian dollar this year. 
Only
the yen held firmly against the dollar. After the parliamentary
elections the yen did fall temporarily by 1/2 to 3/4 of a
percent, but it quickly recovered. Even news of a record trade
deficit for October, at an annual rate of $95 billion, only
temporarily slowed the appreciation of the dollar at the end of
November.
On a trade-weighted average, the dollar is now at an
all-time peak, and stands 56 percent above the low point
reached in July 1980.
During the recent weeks, the major factor fueling the
rise of the dollar was new evidence of the strong expansion in
the United States economy and the implications of that for
interest rates, particularly with large Treasury financing
coming soon.
With healthy economic growth and restrained inflation,
as well as high interest rates, the United States has remained
very attractive to foreign investors. Once again demand for
the dollar for investment purposes has been reinforced by
concern about turbulence in the Middle East and by the malaise
in Europe. Judging from market comments, there were sizable
-
2 -
portfolio shifts into dollars over the period. 
In addition,
with year-end approaching and the dollar rising, many cor-
porations that had been expecting a decline in the dollar, and
consequently had delayed their dollar purchases, apparently
felt they could postpone these purchases no longer.
With the dollar rising, to record levels, foreign
central banks stepped up their spot and forward intervention
sales of dollars. Net dollar sales by major foreign central
banks, which amounted to $108 million during the second half of
November, have surged to $3 billion thus far in December, more
than half of it by the Bundesbank.
The mark in particular has been adversely affected by
the implications of the bankruptcy of the IBH company, the
difficulties of the Schroeder-Muenchmeyer Bank, and the bribery
indictments against two highly-placed leaders. 
On December 5,
as the dollar gapped higher in volatile trading, the U.S.
authorities followed up Bundesbank intervention by purchasing
$50 million-equivalent of marks to help restore more orderly
trading conditions, which was divided equally between the
Federal Reserve and the Treasury. Subsequently, the dollar
continued to rise and in the last week the dollar reached a
ten-year high of nearly DM2.78. 
The Bundesbank responded by
intensifying its intervention operations, selling dollars
heavily in both the spot and forward markets.
-
3 -
Looking back the past several quarters, the dollar has
continued to strengthen even as the U.S. current account has
deteriorated sharply. 
Thus far, capital inflows have been
large enough not only to finance the burgeoning current account
deficit, but also to exert upward pressure on the dollar.
However, the factors generating these large capital inflows
could change abruptly and the markets will be sensitive to any
indications that they are changing, such as a resurgence of a
high level of inflation.
Mr. Chairman, I recommend that the committee ratify
the one intervention operation which was undertaken during the
period--the purchase of $25 million of DM on December-5 on
Federal Reserve account.
Notes for FOMC Meeting, Dec. 19-20, 1983
Peter D. Sternlight
Since the November 15 meeting, Desk operations have sought
to maintain unchanged reserve pressure on the banking system,
characterized by discount window borrowing of about $650 million.
Incoming monetary data were mixed--holding quite close to the
desired track for M2, 
on the high side for M3 and the low side for
Ml. While Ml and M3 pushed close to the lower and upper bounds of
their longer-run ranges, monthly average levels remained within the
specified limits, continuing the "good behavior" of other recent
months. 
Moreover, early December data suggested a pick-up in Ml and
slowing in 
M3 in the current month--setting the stage for a year-end
result that would be within the Committee's bands for all three
measures. Meantime, reports on the economy pointed to continuing
strength, and this was a major factor underlying moderate increases
in interest rates over the period.
While the Desk aimed steadily at reserve conditions
consistent with $650 million of borrowing, actual recourse to the
window varied both above and below that level--averaging fairly
close to $700 million for the period as a whole. A bit curiously,
borrowing was in the $800-$850 million area in the final weeks of
November when the Federal funds rate softened to around 9 1/4 per-
cent after several weeks hugging close to 9 3/8 percent, but in the
first 
two weeks of December when borrowing fell off to about
$450-$650 million, funds traded closer to 9 1/2 percent. The money
market tightened appreciably at the end of the December 14 week,
partly because borrowing had run quite light early in that week, 
and
tight conditions persisted into the current week, exacerbated by tax
date pressures. 
So far this week, the funds rate averaged about
9 3/4 percent while borrowing has averaged over $1 billion, so at
least in this week we seem to be getting a more expected combination
of relatively high borrowing and firm funds, though by today funds
have subsided to 9 1/2 percent. 
There is some anticipation in the
market that the funds rate and day-to-day financing costs may tend a
bit to the high side of recent experience in the period up to about
year-end or a little beyond because of seasonal liquidity pressures.
Desk operations supplied a substantial amount of reserves
over the period, meeting seasonal increases in required reserves and
replacing the reserves absorbed by increases in currency in
circulation. 
The System bought Treasury bills from foreign accounts
on most days of the period, totaling about $2.2 billion, and about
$2 billion of bills was bought in a market go-around on December 14,
for total outright purchases of about $4.2 billion. The System had
also bought nearly $ 1 1/2 billion of Treasury coupon issues the day
of the last meeting, which counted against the intermeeting leeway
for the period ended November 15. 
In the latest period there was a
small offset to the rise in outright holdings through redemptions of
about $85 million in maturing agency issues. Reserve supplies were
augmented on most days by passing through to the market part of the
foreign account repurchase orders, while System repurchase
agreements were used on one occasion.
Incidentally, you may find it 
noteworthy, even startling,
that the System's outright securities holdings are up so far this
year by some $16 billion--a record by far. 
Chiefly, this was needed
to offset the roughly $14 billion rise in currency in circulation.
Market interest rates generally rose in the interval since
the last meeting, chiefly in the latter part of the period when
sentiment seemed to be dominated by news of continuing strong growth
in the economy, and conjecture that the System just had, or was just
about to, firm up a bit on reserve conditions. Early in the period
we were treated for a while to an array of market views that
included both easing and tightening hypotheses as well as adherents
to a no-change view. Those sensing an easing noted the lower
Federal funds rate in the final weeks of November, 
and they also
drew support from the reference in the last published policy record
to the System having aimed for slightly less restraint before the
October meeting. 
At the very same time, other observers noted a
succession of a few weeks with relatively high borrowings and deep
net borrowed reserve numbers and were inclined to conclude that some
modest firming was intended. 
As the period progressed, the weight
of opinion shifted more to a division between the no-change and
slight firming schools, influenced by the rise in the funds rate and
the continuation of strong numbers on the economy--notably the
employment and retail trade data for November. 
The reduction in
published levels of borrowing and net borrowed reserves in the last
couple of weeks seemed to be pretty much shrugged off.
An additional factor weighing on the market was the press
of Treasury offerings in late November, once the debt ceiling
legislation was passed, and then the prospective schedule of fresh
Treasury supplies, with particular concern about the notes and bonds
to be auctioned in the week between Christmas and New Year's Day.
Dealers have tended to position themselves for the expected spate of
offerings by lightening up and even establishing sizable short
positions.
For the full intermeeting period, yields on intermediate to
long-term Treasury issues rose about 20 to 30 basis points, with
longer maturities approaching the highs of last August. As yields
reached higher levels in the last few days, some investor demand
began to emerge, and it may be that a rate level has been attained
at which the market is prepared to take on the large supplies soon
to come from the Treasury. Corporate and municipal yields rose
about in line with Treasury issues, but with a relatively heavy
atmosphere in the tax-exempt sector because of the large calendar of
offerings and substantial inventories.
At the short-end, Treasury bill rates also rose about 20 to
35 basis points over the period. Three- and six-month bills were
auctioned yesterday at 9.04 and 9.24 percent, up from 8.78 and 8.91
just before the last meeting. Rates on commercial paper and CDs
rose about 55 to 75 basis points over the period, thus widening
somewhat the yield spread of these instruments over bills. These
spreads remain fairly narrow in the perspective of long-term
experience, however.
Overall the current market mood might be described as
guarded, and mildly apprehensive. 
A slight firming of policy--such
as might be expected to carry Federal funds rates to the area of
9 1/2 percent or a shade higher--has probably been discounted.
Primary market focus is on the business situation, which most
observers see as one of continuing strength for the time being. 
As
horizons stretch into next year, opinions diverge as to whether one
might expect further upward rate pressure because of a collision of
private and public sector credit demands, or some abatment because a
slowdown in private sector strength makes more room for the Treasury.
Request for continued enlarged leeway:
Mr. 
Chairman, looking ahead to prospective Desk operations
in the next several weeks, 
I believe it would be advisable to retain
the $5 billion intermeeting leeway for change in outright holdings
adopted at the last meeting. This time the enlargement would be
needed to cope with seasonal declines in currency and deposit
levels. Also, if the intermeeting period extends into early
February, we would come up to the final phase-down step of reserve
requirement ratios for member banks stemming from the Monetary
Control Act.
FOMC Briefing
SHAxilrod
Dec. 20, 1983
Mr. Chairman, my briefing will focus on Ml, not because I want
to overstress it, 
but because Ml is the aggregate recently showing the most
variable behavior relative to norms, so to speak; thus it is most in need
of analysis, particularly since in the past its variations over a period of
months have at times provided a reasonably good signal for policy. 
As you
can see from the alternatives presented in the blue book, we still believe
that at something like present interest rates Ml growth will rebound from
the sluggish pace shown over the 4 months ending in November, and we also
believe that rebound will develop in the context of continued moderate
growth in the broader aggregates. 
The growth in M1 of 6 percent at an
annual rate that we are projecting over the first three months of 1984
under alternative B is in fact lower than the several models I have
looked at would suggest, given a funds rate of around 9-1/2 percent and
expansion in nominal GNP at the 10 percent annual rate projected for the
coming quarter. 
Thus, at least as compared with these models, we have
assumed that somewhat more of what might be termed an unwinding of the
very large Ml build-up of 1982 through the first half '83 will continue
into early next year.
One obvious near-term policy issue is how should the Committee
react if M1 comes in significantly different from such expectations (assuming
for the moment that those expectations are satisfactory). 
If relative
weakness or strength in Ml corresponds also with weakness or strength in
the broad aggregates and the economy, the answer would seem to be fairly
clear. 
But the Committee has not for some time been in the relatively
fortunate position where all of the aggregates and the economy have
together given off unequivocal policy signals. 
Thus, if the past is
-2-
any guide, judgments may need to be made about the significance if any for
policy of deviations in Ml from expectations in the context of reasonably
acceptable behavior of the broader aggregates and probably uncertain signals
from the real and price sides.
While statistical analysis has obvious deficiencies as an aid
for making such judgments, it may make a marginal contribution. 
One might
first note that over the four quarters ending with the third quarter of
1983, both our quarterly and monthly models underpredicted actual Ml
growth in the range of 3 to 4 percent for that one-year period. 
If the
excess of actual Ml relative to model predictions is taken, roughly, as a
gauge of the amount of Ml that might eventually support additional spending
as confidence is more fully restored--rather than retained as desired
cash balances given the level of interest rates and income--then one
might say that the shortfall in Ml growth during the fourth quarter would
not itself be an event suggesting the need for an easing in policy. 
In
an arithmetic sense, the fourth quarter of 1983 shortfall "makes up" for
about 25 to 30 percent of the earlier noted 3 to 4 percent overshoot. 
A
6 percent actual growth in the first quarter of '84, given the expected
GNP and unchanged interest rates, would make up for another 10 to 15
percent. 
All of this perhaps excessive statistical analysis tends to
support a view that further shortfalls from expectations can be regarded
with some equanimity, up to a point, in the context of reasonable behavior
of the economy and other aggregates.
The arithmetic may well overstate, however, the potential for
taking shortfalls in stride. 
Allowance should clearly be made for the
inherent uncertainties of econometric analysis, particularly under condi-
tions of institutional change. 
Sane analysts for instance may contend
-3-
that virtually all of the earlier large Ml growth was predictable, given
interest rate behavior. 
Others may assert that the Ml growth of 1982 and
the first half of 1983 simply makes up for the undue weakness in 1981.
Both groups would presumably contend that the recent slowdown in Ml would
represent more of a worrisome new tendency rather than a desirable offset to
earlier strength.
In general, under current circumstances assessment of the signifi-
cance for policy of the recent slowdown in Ml growth seems inevitably
ambiguous. 
If one views the recent slowdown in the context of rapid growth
in Ml over the whole year 1983, a growth that follows relatively fast
growth in 1982, one might not worry much about the potential for an undue
deceleration in economic activity, and one might even be concerned about
inflationary possibilities, particularly with fiscal policy remaining highly
stimulative. 
On the other hand, if emphasis is instead placed only on the
recent slowdown in Ml growth, recessionary concerns would become more
prominent.
Those twin possibilities might argue for treating symmetrically
the implications for bank reserve positions of overshoots or undershoots
in Ml relative to path over the coming months, assuming there is going to
be any response at all given behavior of the broader aggregates and the
economy. 
However, it is plausible to me that there is still some room--
in view of the sizable earlier growth in Ml--for permitting at least same
degree of relatively slow growth in Ml for a time, particularly if the
economy continues reasonably strong. 
That reasoning would seem to suggest
a degree of asymmetry in response to deviations in Ml from expectations
such as those associated with alternative B--with undershoots being a bit
less of concern than overshoots.
APPENDIX
January 18, 1983
TO: 
Federal Open Market Committee
FROM: 
S. H. Axilrod
As mentioned by Chairman Volcker last Friday, a framework for
specifying and explaining the operational meaning of longer-run monetary
and credit targets for 1983 is attached for consideration. Such a frame-
work provides a basis for construction of the directive to be adopted at
the February meeting and for explanation in the semi-annual report to
Congress. 
Specific numerical alternatives for the longer-term ranges
for 1983 will be presented in the February blue book.
Attachment
January 18, 1983
The Federal Open Market Committee established growth ranges for M2
and M3 in 1983 of 
to 
and 
to 
percent, respectively. 
In
association with these objectives, total credit was expected to expand in
a __ 
to __ 
percent range. The Committee agreed that specification of a
growth range for Ml was not feasible at this time because of distortions
introduced by the transition to the money market deposit accounts 
(MMDAs)
and super-NOW accounts that depository institutions have been able to offer
at competitive market interest rates since mid-December and early January,
respectively.
The super-NOWs are included in Ml, but MMDAs, because of their
more limited transactions features, are included only in the broader
monetary aggregates. 
In the transition period, the nature and meaning of
Ml may change substantially, as some investment-type funds shift into Ml
through super-NOW accounts and some transactions funds shift out of Ml
into MMDAs. 
Even after the bulk of shifts has been completed, 
the behavior
of Ml will be difficult to evaluate before some experience is gained.
Nonetheless, the Committee intends to monitor developments with
respect to Ml closely, in conjunction with the behavior of the broader
monetary aggregates that will serve as the principal guides for monetary
policy at least over the next several months. 
At the time of the mid-year
report to Congress, the Committee will again assess the feasibility of
providing a numerical specification for Ml.
The behavior of the broader monetary aggregates will also be
influenced in 
some degree by shifts of funds generated by the introduction
of the new deposit accounts, with effects larger on M2 than on M3. 
Even
-2-
though the bulk of shifts is likely to be among components of these aggre-
gates and thus will not affect the totals, shifts into MMDAs from market
instruments, or from large time deposits currently included only in M3, will
work to raise M2, especially early in the year when most of the adjustments
are expected to take place. 
[Insert sentence about how ranges adopted
for 1983, and possibly expected actual behavior relative to them, may be
influenced by shifts.]
In assessing the performance of the aggregates over the year,
and recognizing the inherent volatility of money and credit aggregates, the
Committee will look not only to their growth from QIV '82 to QIV '83, but
also will evaluate emerging trends on a year-over-year basis. Because
growth of M2 and possibly also M3 may be higher relative to target early
in the year, this would contribute to raising growth on a year-over-year
basis. 
[The following language suggests an alternative method for basing
the monetary aggregates in 1983: To reduce the distorting influence on
growth ranges of the large-scale shifts of funds since the last half of
December stemming from the public's initial adjustment to the newly
available deposit accounts, the Committee's ranges for M2 and M3 represent
annual rates of growth from the average levels of these aggregates out-
standing in the three-month period from December '82 to February '83 (or
two months from January '82 to February '83) to the average level in
QIV '83.]
The associated range for total credit expansion provides a broader
context for helping to interpret the behavior of the monetary aggregates
over the course of the year as well as the thrust of monetary policy. This
range represents the percentage increase in funds raised by domestic
-3-
nonfinancial sectors in the form of debt [and equity issues]. 
Such an
aggregate is not likely to be much affected by shifting preferences by the
public for various financial assets, including money and near-money assets,
and by changes in the extent to which borrowers obtain the credit needed
to finance economic recovery at depository institutions or in the open
market.
Historical experience nonetheless suggests that the relationships
to nominal GNP of credit aggregates, as well as of monetary aggregates, are
relatively loose. On the credit side, spending can be financed out of
internal cash flows or by drawing down existing assets, rather than by net
additions to debt. 
On the side of money, existing cash balances can be
employed more or less intensively in financing economic activity, as re-
flected in variations in the velocity of money. The broader aggregates,
which are not closely related to the reserve base of depository institutions
and which are largely composed of assets offering market interest rates,
tend to fluctuate with credit demands, the aggressiveness with which insti-
tutions seek funds, and the public's savings propensities.
Thus, the implementation of monetary policy necessarily also
involves evaluation of evolving market conditions, as typified by trends
in domestic interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar as
well as by ongoing changes in the velocity of money or credit. They pro-
vide information about market expectations, demands for liquidity, attitudes
toward inflation or disinflation, and the strength or weakness of credit
demands that contributes to assessment of money and credit behavior in
relation to the ranges set for them and the performance of the economy.
