APPENDIX
Notes for FOMC Meeting
December 18-19, 1980
Scott E. Pardee
During most of the period since the November 18 meeting, the dollar continued
to be in demand against most major currencies. The further rise of U.S. interest rates,
particularly as translated through the Euro-markets, was universally cited as the major reason
for the dollar's strength. Other factors--concern over the possibility of Soviet military action in
Poland, the latest hike in the OPEC oil price, and the general outlook for the current account
balances--all influenced traders from time to time, but the pressure of U.S. interest rates has
dominated market sentiment. Our impression is that although substantial amounts of funds
have moved into dollars, the volumes have not been as massive as in other instances in which
dollar rates have been bid up. Indeed, we have heard isolated reports of U.S. corporate
treasurers who were borrowing dollars abroad rather than selling foreign currencies to make
year-end repatriations on the expectation that the dollar will decline again in the exchange
market. And several OPEC central banks have been known to take advantage of the rather
depressed exchange rates for other currencies to shift funds out of dollars. Also, the market
has been thin, which has led to some backing and filling, as usually happens toward year-end
There is a strong impression that once U.S. interest rates finally do peak out, the dollar will fall
back in the exchange market. The dollar has settled back over recent days even though the
direction of U.S. interest rates is still in doubt. On balance the dollar has advanced by 4
percent against the German mark and other EMS currencies, 3 percent against the pound
sterling, and has declined 1-1/2 percent against the Japanese yen.
The U.S. dollar also advanced by 1-1/2 percent against the Canadian dollar. The
Canadians were hit particularly hard by the surge in U.S. [unintelligible] in a situation in which
their reserves were already depleted. They raised with us the possibility of drawing on the
swap line for bridge financing while they arranged for takedowns on their standing credit
facilities with Canadian and other banks. After consultation with the FOMC Subcommittee
and the Treasury, I have told them that we would agree to a drawing of up to $300 million. In
other intervention, we have continued to pile up marks, perhaps not so vigorously as before
now that the Treasury is fully covered under the Carter notes, and the Federal Reserve wanted
2
to review its own situation. We bought a total of $2.0 billion, of which $340 million was put
into System balances. These now amount to $1,433 million equivalent. The remaining marks
went to the Treasury, which now has $300 to $500 million in excess of its needs under the
Carter notes. Yesterday, when the dollar dropped off sharply in thin trading we sold a net of
$41 million of marks out of System and Treasury trading balances using two-way prices to
settle the market.
James L. Kichline
December 18, 1980
FOMC BRIEFING
Incoming evidence on economic activity generally has
continued upbeat in recent weeks, and it is clear the economy
developed a good deal of momentum this quarter. 
Our assessment
of available information has led us to raise the projection of
real GNP growth in the current quarter to 4 
percent at an annual
rate. 
But the recent pace of activity appears to be unsustainable,
and we continue to believe fundamental forces affecting activity--
including monetary and fiscal policy--dictate a slowdown in the
near term and a sluggish economy over the forecast horizon.
Labor demands have continued to strengthen in recent
months while the unemployment rate has remained in the neighbor-
hood of 7 
percent. 
In November, nonfarm employment rose 1/4 
mil-
lion, bringing the total rise in payroll employment to 1 million
above the trough in July. 
In addition, the average length of the
workweek increased a bit further last month. 
Even if one assumes
no expansion in December, total labor hours will increase at an
annual rate of 6-1/2 
percent this quarter. 
A good deal of the growth
in hours has been in the manufacturing sector, where many workers
have been recalled from layoff.
The strength of the labor market in recent months has been
associated with sizable increases in industrial production. 
In
November the industrial production index rose nearly 1-1/2 
percent,
and output was revised up for the preceding two months. 
Output
gains recently have been fairly widespread, with continued very
large increases in production of steel and other durable materials
-2-
as well as construction products.
For a while it appeared that a substantial inventory
imbalance was in the making, given rapid growth in output and
reported weakness in final sales. 
Although we still anticipate
some buildup in inventories this quarter, following liquidation
last quarter, the size of the near-term problem has been limited
by the reported strength of final sales. 
In the retail sector,
sales figures were revised up considerably for October and the
advance data for November indicate further expansion. 
However,
the anecdotal evidence on retail sales since November, in the
Redbook and elsewhere, is mixed but generally suggestive of sluggish
sales; our forecast implies a slowing of sales this month and on
into early 1981. 
Should consumers finally behave as predicted, a
prompt cutback in output growth will be needed to avoid a larger
inventory adjustment than in the current forecast.
The auto sector already is on this course, cutting produc-
tion in response to disappointing sales. 
Domestic auto sales have
moved within a range of 6 
to 7 million units at an annual rate
from July through the first third of December. 
The much heralded
introduction of new, more fuel-efficient models obviously has not
solved the overall problems of the industry. 
Auto assembly
schedules have been reduced in recent weeks and for December are
currently planned to drop 10 percent from those in November.
Although rebate programs at Ford and Chrysler may help to hold up
sales in the very short run, it still seems likely that sales will
move down a little early next year under the pressure of tight
financial conditions and declining real disposable incomes.
-3-
Housing activity also appears to be on the verge of a
drop, but one could not detect that in the figures for November.
Starts were surprisingly strong at somewhat over a 1 
million unit
annual rate, the same pace that has prevailed since September, and
permits increased slightly. 
Perhaps the market has performed
better than generally anticipated for a variety of reasons, includ-
ing good weather, the growing use of creative financing techniques,
and less resistance to high interest rates that had a rather prompt,
visible effect the first time around. 
Nevertheless, it is difficult
to conceive that the mass of qualitative evidence pointing to a
sharp decline is wrong in the face of construction loan rates
above 20 percent and permanent financing rates that are averaging
nearly 15 percent nationwide. 
In the forecast, housing starts drop
to a little over a million units early next year and remain there
through 1982, reflecting continued tight financial market conditions
and weak growth of incomes. 
If interest rates were to move lower
than now expected, housing would surely strengthen, particularly
in light of the demographic factors and pent-up demands.
For the business sector, information on shipments of
capital goods, truck sales, and nonresidential construction activity
point to a further decline in fixed investment in real terms this
quarter. 
Exceptionally strong activity in the petroleum sector
has helped limit the drop in capital outlays this year and should
continue to do so next year as well. 
But the evidence on orders
and contracts generally suggests a weak investment sector going
into 1981. 
Moreover, a slackening of final sales and the continued
-4-
high cost of capital seem likely to increase business caution in
making longer-term commitments.
The downturn in economic activity that is projected for
the first half of next year could well coincide with a deteriora-
tion in price statistics, especially this winter. 
Energy prices
are projected to rise rapidly early next year, as producers take
the opportunity to pass through higher costs of imported and domestic
petroleum products at a time when large stocks will probably have
been worked down. 
Food prices, particularly meats, are also pro-
jected to continue rising faster than the average rate of inflation
in light of tight supplies and rising input costs. 
Upward pressure
on prices next year also will come from the payroll tax increase
beginning January, which is estimated to raise inflation about
percentage point from what it would otherwise be in 1981. 
Under-
lying these factors, moreover, is the projected large further
rise of unit labor costs next year. 
By 1982, however, the fore-
cast shows visible progress in reducing the rate of inflation, a
reflection of the impact of persistent slack in labor and product
markets as well as the beneficial expectational impacts of consis-
tent anti-inflationary policies.
On the policy side, both monetary and fiscal policy
assumed in the forecast act to restrain 
growth of nominal GNP.
For monetary policy, strong nominal transactions demands are
thought to entail high nominal interest rates throughout the fore-
cast period if specified growth rates of the monetary aggregates are
to be achieved. 
For fiscal policy, the high employment budget
-5-
surplus continues to rise even with a $35 billion tax reduction
assumed for next year. 
But the actual budget totals simply look
awful, a $60 billion deficit in fiscal 1981 and over $75 billion
in 1982. 
In large part this is a reflection of an economy operat-
ing well below potential. 
In addition, it reflects the great
difficulty in cutting quickly and deeply into growth of nondefense
outlays.
FOMC Briefing
December 19, 1980
S. H. Axilrod
The blue book provides the Committee with a basis for judging the
economic implications of various alternative money targets and strategies.
The approach labeled strategy 1 involves the same 1/2 percent point
reduction in 1981 of target ranges for the M-l's that was tentatively agreed
to by the Committee in July. 
That approach is consistent of course with
an effort gradually to reduce money growth over time as a means of promoting
price stability. But, as it turns out, all of the other alternative 1981
growth rates for the M-l's shown in the blue book could also be interpreted
as being consistent with a policy of gradually reducing money growth. That
is possible because all of them would involve lower M-1 growth than in 1980,
abstracting from the impact of deposit shifts into newly introduced interest-
bearing checking accounts (called OCD's). 
In 1980, the actual growth rate
of M-lA, for example, will be around 5 percent, but the growth abstracting
from deposit shifts into OCD's is estimated at 6 
to 6-3/4 
percent. The
various M-1A assumptions on a comparable basis for 1981 employed in the
blue book ranged between 3 and 6 percent.
Thus, in deciding on its longer-run target for 1981 the Committee
would probably want to consider whether to take off from the effective
growth attained for, say, M-1A in 1980--that is after adding back deposit
shifts--or from targeted growth. 
If the FOMC were to reduce effective
growth by 
point next year, that would imply growth of about 6 percent. 
If
it were to reduce targeted growth, that would imply growth in a range with
a midpoint of 4-1/4 
percent, as tentatively decided in July. Our quarterly
econometric model would not suggest any substantially different price
effects next year from such a difference in money growth rates--the effects
come later. 
Price expectations change slowly in the model and are based
solely on past price behavior; thus, the model would not allow for any
decline of inflationary expectations based on Fed monetary targeting
decisions or other of what might be termed exogenous events.
The Committee may therefore wish to consider the likely impact
on inflationary psychology from announcement of longer-term targets. If
the Committee were to indicate that the effective growth of M-1A in 1980
was really 6 to 6-3/4 
percent and that growth in 1981 would be brought down
from there to a range centering on a rate 1/2 point lower, under current
circumstances--with price increases perhaps accelerating early next year
when the targets will be announced and restraint on the Federal budget
uncertain--inflationary psychology might be adversely affected. To the
extent that such a monetary approach could be understood by the public, they
might well conclude that the Fed had created even more money than earlier
thought and would be doing the same next year. Of course, it should be
pointed out that we have little evidence about how the public reacts to
announced targets, and the Fed would be able to condition reactions to an
extent through its explanation of the chosen target.
However that may be, if next year's growth target represented a
reduction from the current target range, rather than from growth actually
achieved, there would be virtually no risk of exacerbating inflationary
psychology from announcement of the targets. And also probably virtually
no risk of doing so if this year's targets were retained, instead of reduced.
But in either case there would also seem to be little room, if any, for
an expansion of real GNP over 1981, unless there were a rather startling
and rather prompt improvement in attitudes toward inflation (or a reduction
in upward price pressures stemming from a near miraculous rebound in pro-
ductivity).
-3-
In considering M-1A, and also M-lB ranges, the Committee would
also need to take account of the probability that M-1 targets will or will
not be consistent with what the Committee takes to be a tolerable, if
not satisfactory, increase in nominal GNP over the year. 
The tentative
monetary targets already set for next year can be viewed as quite restrictive
relative to a 9 or 10 percent rise in nominal GNP. For instance, they
would imply a larger downward shift in demand for M-1A, after allowing for
whatever shift will be due to NOW accounts, than took place last year.
There are good reasons for that: large downward shifts have occurred in
recent years following new, unusually high interest rate peaks--witness
the years 1975, 1976 and the second quarter of 1980--and shifts can be
particularly large when these peak rate levels occur at a time when new
financial technology is in any event causing the public to reconsider
cash balance needs (as will be the case next year). 
On the other hand, it
should be pointed out that there has already been very extensive economiza-
tion of cash balances since the mid-70's, and the question can legitimately
be raised as to whether there is any significant amount of cash left to
be economized, apart from the transfers out of demand deposits expected
as a result of nationwide NOW accounts.
I should mention a problem that needs to be considered
with respect to the broader aggregates. 
It would appear that nominal
GNP growth of 9 percent or so next year would entail some increase in the
total of funds raised in financial markets--currently, we estimate a con-
servative increase of a little over 5 percent. Even assuming that the share
of total credit advanced by banks and thrift institutions together declines
a bit, if depository institutions are to meet the projected credit demands,
it would appear that growth in M-2 next year may well need to exceed the
upper limit of the 1931 range for that aggregate tentatively set by the
FOMC at mid-year and that growth in M-3 would be near the upper end of its
range.
So far in this review of issues involved in next year's monetary
targets I have not mentioned the difficult problem of public understanding
of the behavior of M-1A and M-1B in light of deposit shifts into new
NOW accounts. In setting its 1981 targets for M-1A and M-1B in February the
Committee if it follows past practice would adjust the target ranges to
reflect the estimated distorting effects of such deposit shifts. The blue
book appendix on the subject contains a wide range of estimates that
center on a 4 percentage point reduction in M-1A and a 2 percentage point
increase in M-1B. 
If the public focuses on M-1B growth, and ignores the
low M-1A, the upward adjustment in the M-1B range, and presumably the
accompanying relatively high actual growth, could be given--erroneously--
an inflationary interpretation. The interpretation may be more likely to
arise in the degree that actual M-lB growth comes in above target, as it
could if we have underestimated the likely shift out of savings deposits
into NOW accounts--as is certainly possible, partly because the differential
between yields on NOW and ordinary savings accounts at banks will disappear
at the beginning of the year.
One implication for monetary targeting from these various
uncertainties is to widen the ranges for M-1A and M-1B from their present
2 percentage point width, explaining that is necessary to allow for the
uncertainties about deposit shifts. Another approach would be to specify
target ranges in terms of effective growth in M-l's abstracting from
deposit shifts, instead of actual growth. 
This approach has certain
disadvantages, however. 
If the public is to be able to track behavior
of the M-l's relative to such a target, the System would have to publish
regularly estimates of deposit shifts into NOW and related accounts by
source, so that the public could make adjustments to translate actual
growth into effective growth on a current basis. 
But publication of,
for example, weekly estimates of such shifts would be pretending to more
certainty than we have, may be confusing,and would probably also entail
showing the higher growth rates for M-lA in effective terms in 1979 and
1980 for comparative purposes.
Of course, some data on deposit shifts will be needed next year
however the Committee decides to present its M-l targets. 
Thus, the
staff will in any event be seeking additional information. We are pro-
posing to ask a sample of banks and probably other depository institutions
from time to time to estimate sources of funds flowing into new NOW and
related accounts. That data will be needed internally to help determine
if the assumptions about deposit shifts that lie behind actual monetary
growth targets--both short- and long-term ones--need to be modified.
In brief summary of what seems to me to be a difficult decision
for the Committee, there are strong arguments for widening the ranges for
the M-l's. 
This would be an indirect way of downplaying their importance
in the period ahead, but would have the disadvantage of seeming to loosen
monetary discipline. On whether the central tendency of the ranges for
effective growth in the M-l's in 1981 set in July should be retained, raised,
or lowered, the decision would appear to depend strongly on how much pressure
the Committee considers feasible to place on the economy relative to the
apparent sizable built-in upward price pressures and how the Committee
assesses likely public response to its announced targets. Finally, on the
-6-
broader aggregates, there seems to be a good chance that the lower range
set in July for M-2 may be too low for practical purposes, as indeed even
may be a range for 1981 unchanged from 1980. 
The Committee would need to
weigh whether the loss in credibility from raising the range at this
point is greater than the risk to credibility of a probable overshoot of
the range next year.
F.O.M.C. MEETING
DECEMBER 18-19, 
1980
REPORT OF OPEN
MARKET OPERATIONS
Reporting on open market operations, Mr. Sternlight made
the following statement.
The financial markets have come through considerable
turbulence in the period since the November FOMC meeting--but
it's possible that an experience of this kind will prove helpful
in the process of taming the monetary aggregates. Not that I think
all 
the turbulence is behind us or that money supply is assuredly
under firm control now, but we've begun to get some real sense
of the bite of monetary restraint in other areas besides housing
and thrift 
institutions. 
It's 
becoming painfully expensive to hold
inventories, whether of cars or commodities. 
There is 
even a glimmer-
ing of abatement in monetary growth, though it is surely premature
for rejoicing over what could be a fine Christmas present indeed,
if it came about.
The recent period began with dreary similarity to the
preceding several months. 
Barely a few days after the last 
meeting
it 
looked as though monetary growth was running substantially above
desired path levels, and as the Desk pursued reserve targets
associated with the slow desired pace, more pressure was placed on
the banking system. 
Discount window borrowing was pushed higher and
money rates surged upward. 
Restraint was reinforced about midway
through the period when the nonborrowed reserve path was reduced
by $170 million, or by half of the then-anticipated bulge of total
reserves above path. The December 5 discount rate and surcharge
increases further accented the System's restraining posture. 
Whether
because of the recently increased restraint, or in lagged response
to earlier restraint, one cannot say, but as the period progressed
the bulge of projected reserve demands for the intermeeting period
worked down to about $200 million at last report, compared to
$300-400 million in the opening weeks.
In the earlier part of the period,given the large bulge
in reserve demand above path, and then the deliberate reduction
in the nonborrowed reserve path about midway in the interval, the
Desk aimed for nonborrowed reserve levels such that borrowing was
expected to be around $1.9 to $2 billion. 
More recently, as the
overshoot in reserve demand abated, the expected borrowing level
receded somewhat to the $1.6 -$1.7 billion area. 
Federal funds
have stayed quite high, however, partly reflecting a momentum of
market developments reinforced by the discount rate action about
midway in the period.
Around the time of the last meeting, the funds rate had
just surged to higher levels in the wake of the discount rate action
announced November 14. 
Trading was somewhat above the 17 percent
upper bound adopted at the November 18 meeting, although there was
a widespread view both in the market and on the official side that
the rate probably would tend to decline shortly as the market re-
gained composure after the discount rate move. 
Any such tendency
was offset, however, as the strengthening monetary aggregates led
to greater needs for borrowings. 
Thus the average funds rate in
the first full week after the last meeting rose over 2 percentage
points to nearly 17 1/2 percent. Against that backdrop the Committee
3
raised its upper bound on funds to 18 percent and pursuit of
reserve objectives in the next week led to an average rate around
17.70 percent. In the following week, the Board approved a further
rise in the discount and surcharge rates, and once again there
was an immediate upsurge in the funds trading rate--initially to
about 20-21 percent. To permit operational flexibility to pursue
the reserve targets, the Committee temporarily suspended the 18
percent funds ceiling--though with the understanding that operations
were not to proceed in total disregard of where funds traded or the
impact this might have on the markets more generally. The average
rate in the December 10 week pushed up to about 18.80 percent,
while in the December 17 week it was 19.83 percent. Yesterday was
20 3/4.
The Desk operated mainly through temporary reserve ad-
justments, as befitted a period marked by particular uncertainty
in reserve estimates partly due to changed reporting procedures
in the wake of implementation of the Monetary Control Act. There
was also substantial uncertainty about desired levels of excess
reserves. 
The recent high reported levels of excess reserves,
though reduced somewhat by subsequent revisions, remain something
of puzzle. 
And in case all 
this was not enough, a further
complication was the reserve impact of the winding down of weekend
Eurodollar reserve-saving games, which added to requirements during
the period. 
In addition to its 
temporary transactions, the Desk
provided for some permanent reserve additions, toward the end of
the period, through the purchase of about $900 million in Treasury
bills in the market, and some $400 million in bills and $100 million
in coupon issues from foreign accounts.
The rise in rates since the last meeting was exceptionally
sharp in the money market area, as banks came under pressure to
meet reserve needs and fund present and anticipated loan increases.
Bank CD rates rose by some 3 to 6 percentage points over the period,
reaching about 21 percent for 3-month maturities before receding
a bit near the end of the period. 
This was well above peak of
about 18 1/2 percent for 3-month CD's last March. 
Commercial
paper rates also scaled new heights, pushing close to 21 percent
and rising a net of some 4 to 5 1/2 percentage points for the period.
The bank prime rate rose 4 3/4 percentage points, reaching 21
percent, and Citibank moved to 21 1/2 percent this morning.
At the same time, Treasury bill 
rates rose by some 1 to 3
percentage points through mid-day yesterday, although some appre-
ciable part of this has been reversed in the past 24 hours. 
At lastl
Monday's auction, 3- and 6-month bills were sold at average rates
of 16.67 and 15.42 percent, compared with 14.31 and 13.92 percent
the day before the last meeting. The latest 3-month auction rate
was a new record, while the 6-month was some 30 basis points under
the record set last March. Latest market rates have come off
those peaks. 
Based on the latest 6-month rate, banks and thrifts
can pay as high as 15.67 percent for $10,000 6-month certificates--
a rate that substantially exceeds the thrifts' earnings rates.
Short-term coupon issues also showed sizable yield increases
The yields of intermediate-term Treasury issues were up a more
moderate 100 basis points or so, while active long-term issues
showed little net change for the period. Early in the interval,
long-term issues held their own pretty well, as there seemed to be
a feeling that increased monetary restraint, while raising short
rates, would depress the economy and encourage a return to price
stability. As the period went on, and short rates pressed still
higher while news on the economy still pointed to some areas of
strength, the long end weakened, too; but in the last couple of
days there has been a price recovery, partly based on anticipations
of dramatic actions that the new Reagan Administration might take,
and partly on anticipations of some weakening in money growth.
During much of the period, the prospect of sizable Treasury deficit
financing, as well as of monetary restraint, was a depressant in
the Government market. The Treasury sold 2- and 4-year notes this
week at yields of 15.15 and 14.03 percent, and the market now faces
a 7-year issue to be auctioned December 30 and a 15- or 20-year
issue early in the new year.
Despite the volatility of securities prices, the Treasury
market functioned reasonably well. Activity was thin, but not
obviously disorderly or panicky. Auctions have been amply covered.
Government securities dealers have managed, so far as we are aware,
to avoid serious losses, although there has been red ink for some.
In fact, amidst all the turbulence we even managed to
add another name to the list of dealers trading with our Desk--
Smith Barney, an old line name in investment banking, but only
recently an active Government securities dealer.
