APPENDIX
NOTES FOR FOMC MEETING
NOVEMBER 14, 1989
SAM Y. CROSS
During the past six weeks, the dollar has traded in a
relatively narrow range, with the market unwilling to take it either
much higher or much lower. 
The strong upward pressures that we
experienced during August and September have been dissipating, and the
Desk has not intervened since October 12th. 
But the dollar's
resilience on the down side has also been impressive, and good
investment demand for dollar assets has continued to provide firm
support throughout the period.
There were three important developments during the past six
weeks which, in combination, have tended to subdue the dollar's
earlier exuberance.
The first of these developments was the persistent official
intervention operations after the release of the September 23
statement of the Group of Seven (G-7). 
The initial rounds of heavy
and coordinated intervention following the G-7 meeting took the market
a bit by surprise, partly in that the central banks uncharacteristi-
cally intervened both within and outside their home markets. 
Despite
these unusual tactics, market participants remained doubtful that the
central banks would keep up their coordinated dollar sales if upward
pressure on the dollar were to reemerge, and in early October the
dollar began turning up again in part because of this view.
In fact, we continued intervening against a rising dollar and
sold another $1,310 million ($920 million of this against yen and $390
million against marks) during the first 10 days of the intermeeting
period. 
The Japanese also intervened heavily during this period,
selling 
the amount we sold against the yen. 
These
operations signaled to the market the depth and persistence of
official commitment to resist the dollar's rise.
A second development which reduced the dollar's appeal was a
series of interest rate adjustments which sharply narrowed interest
differentials favorable to the dollar. 
In early October, the
Bundesbank increased its official interest rates by one percentage
point, and this move was quickly followed by most other European
countries. A week later, the Japanese raised their discount rate by
one-half percentage point. Meanwhile, dollar short-term interest
rates have declined by around one-half of a percentage point over the
intermeeting period. 
These interest rate adjustments have shaved 100-
150 basis points off the short-term differentials favoring the dollar,
bringing the cumulative narrowing since last April to more than 350
basis points.
Volatility in the U.S. stock market and a perception of
vulnerabilities in U.S. financial markets generally were a third
factor lessening the market's appetite for dollars. 
After the 190-
point decline in the Dow Jones index on October 13, the dollar fell by
more than six yen and seven pfennigs in two trading days, largely on
concerns that foreign investment in the United States would be
deterred and that the U.S. economy might be adversely affected by
further large stock market declines. These concerns, it seems,
continue to be a background factor influencing market sentiment, and
in recent weeks the dollar has at times seemed to follow the Dow.
Despite these three body blows, the dollar continues to
receive strong support, particularly from Japanese demand for U.S.
securities and fixed investments. 
In the past two months, there have
been reports of several large Japanese acquisitions in the United
States--the recent purchases of Columbia Pictures and Rockefeller
Center being among the most conspicuous examples. 
There also seems to
have been considerable Japanese interest in the U.S. Treasuries
market.
Japanese capital outflows have not affected only the
dollar--the mark and other currencies have benefited as well. With
Japanese interest rates having moved up later, and by less, than
European rates, most European currencies have advanced significantly
against the yen. But, with the Japanese economy continuing to grind
out massive savings and the United States still seen as the safest,
largest and most liquid of the world's financial markets, it is
expected that there will continue to be a flow of Japanese investment
into dollar assets.
On a separate note, the mark has benefited not only from the
recent increases in interest rates there, but also from a growing
sense of confidence in the German economy. One factor fostering this
sense of confidence has been the inflow of skilled German immigrants
from Eastern Europe. 
In recent days, this factor has been
overshadowed by increased apprehension over the pace of change in
Eastern Europe in general, and in East Germany in particular. As the
political situation in East Germany deteriorated, a sense of
uncertainty made market participants hesitant about the short-term
situation in West Germany, even though the longer-term effects may be
very beneficial for the German economy.
One currency which has not benefited as it might have from
foreign investment inflows during the past six weeks is sterling.
Sterling has declined significantly against the dollar, and has fallen
even more sharply against the mark, with the policy dispute between
the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Prime Minister's personal
economic advisor that resulted in both their resignations. 
The pound
has since stabilized, in part because high British interest rates make
it costly to hold short sterling positions, but nervousness regarding
the currency's stability persists.
Looking ahead, there continues to be a disparity between the
prognostications of economists on the one hand and the attitude of
institutional investors on the other. Most economic analysts contend
that in volume terms the U.S. trade balance already fully reflects the
benefits of the dollar's decline since 1985, that the price benefits
of the dollar's rise in 1988 and 1989 may be wearing off, and that
macro-economic trends worldwide will lead to a lower dollar. However,
investors at least so far have continued to shrug off these warnings
and take the view that a sharp decline in the dollar's value is
unlikely. And in the event the dollar moves lower, they believe,
rightly or wrongly, that they can protect themselves from undue losses
through hedging and other techniques.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the Committee's approval
for our operations during the intermeeting period. 
The Desk sold $460
million against yen and $195 million against marks for the Federal
Reserve on six trading days between October 3 and 12 to resist upward
pressure on the dollar, and we sold an equal amount for the account of
the Treasury. 
I would also like to report to the Committee that the
U.S. Treasury has warehoused $1 billion worth of German marks with the
Federal Reserve, bringing the total now warehoused to $7 billion of
the $10 billion authorized. 
Separately, let me bring to your
attention that Mexico has repaid $13 million of the $168.2 million
provided equally by the Federal Reserve and the ESF as part of a
$672.6 million multilateral facility.
I would also seek the Committee's approval to renew the
Federal Reserve swap agreements with other central banks and the Bank
-5-
for International Settlements (BIS), all of which come up for renewal
in December. Apart from recent swap drawings by Mexico, these
facilities have not been drawn on for a number of years, by either the
Federal Reserve or any of our counterparties, and they cannot be drawn
except by reciprocal agreement at the time of a request. 
Nonetheless,
it is important to maintain these facilities in being. 
I recommend
extention for an additional year, without substantive change.
NOTES FOR FOMC MEETING
NOVEMBER 14, 1989
PETER D. STERNLIGHT
Domestic Desk operations began the recent period by aiming
for unchanged reserve pressures, but conditions were eased in two
steps during the period in recognition of a softer business situation
and risks of more pronounced weakness. 
The easing steps, which
followed Committee conference calls on October 18 and November 6, each
entailed reductions of $50 million in the expected level of seasonal
and adjustment borrowing, and each was associated with expected
reductions of about 1/4 percent in the range of federal funds trading.
This reduced the anticipated funds rate from around 9 percent during
the first half of October to about 8-3/4 percent through early
November and then around 8-1/2 percent in recent days. 
Interspersed
with these policy-related adjustments, several downward technical
adjustments were made in the path level of borrowing, totalling $200
million, roughly keeping pace with the steep decline in seasonal
borrowing. 
In all, the path borrowing level was reduced by $300
million--from $550 million to $250 million.
The first small easing move, formalized on October 18, was no
surprise to the market, coming in the wake of the sharp break in stock
prices on October 13. 
Indeed, there had been some slight expectations
of an easing step even before October 13, given a sense of softening
business conditions and moderating inflation. This had been reflected
in a tendency for funds to trade fairly often a shade below the widely
perceived 9 percent center of gravity that prevailed through September
and early October. Press comment citing official views on likely
System accommodation after the stock break increased expectations of a
more distinct move, so the shift to an 8-3/4 percent central tendency
for funds was virtually accomplished for us, and it took hold readily
in the market.
The further downshift to 8-1/2 percent, while consistent with
general expectations of further easing in coming months, surprised the
market as to timing--particularly as it followed closely the October
employment report in early November. This report was considered a bit
stronger than expected and likely if anything to push off the date of
a next easing step. 
To accomplish this easing, the Desk somewhat
oversupplied reserves following the November 6 conference call,
encouraging funds to drift lower, though taking care not to act in an
over-aggressive way that might have been inconsistent with the
intended caution of the move. 
Still, within a couple of days, market
participants concluded that a move had been undertaken. Again, media
coverage, with purported "inside information", accented the move.
Having supplied reserves fairly generously in making the move, and
then learning of market factor reserve revisions, the Desk drained
reserves in recent days, partly to head off a developing view that the
easing move might have been greater than intended. Market
participants are pretty well convinced now that funds can be expected
to trade around 8-1/2 percent, though there remains an aura of
expectation of some further easing in the next month or two.
Actual borrowing levels ran above path in the early part of
the period, reflecting a tight wind-up to the October 4 reserve period
and some fairly heavy borrowing over the long Columbus Day weekend.
In the November 1 maintenance period borrowing ran a little below path
while borrowing thus far in the current period has remained below
path--somewhat under $200 million as seasonal borrowing has fallen
rapidly in recent weeks and adjustment credit has been light.
Desk operations during the period were complicated by debt
limit considerations. A temporary debt ceiling expired on October 31
and a new ceiling was not signed into law until November 8. In that
interval, the Treasury could issue no new debt, forcing the System to
redeem a $3.5 billion bill holding without the usual exchange for new
bills with the Treasury. 
In order to beef up its cash to the maximum
possible extent before the temporary limit expired, the Treasury
accelerated the payment for the bills auctioned October 30 to October
31. 
Because of the acceleration, the System could not pay for new
bills on October 31, as the November 2 bills we would normally present
in payment had not matured. The Treasury also sold some cash
management bills for October 31 payment. By taking payment early and
maximizing their cash take, the Treasury's cash balance rose sharply
on October 31 to levels well above the capacity of their commercial
bank tax and loan account depositories--thus absorbing reserves as
well as imposing a significant short-term financing burden on dealers,
who had underwritten an unusually heavy share of the financing.
Up to that point in the intermeeting period, the Desk had
been primarily in a reserve-absorbing posture, offsetting the earlier
impact of foreign exchange intervention and other reserve factors by
selling about $1.5 billion of Treasury securities to foreign accounts
and redeeming $800 million of bills. 
Together with the forced
redemption of $3.5 billion November 2 bills, this total reduction in
system holdings momentarily approached the $6 billion intermeeting
leeway limit. 
Beginning October 30 the Desk began buying bills from
foreign accounts, acquiring about $300 million over several days, and
on November 1 the Desk bought about $3.2 billion of bills in the
market for November 2 delivery, nearly replacing the forced
redemption. On balance, outright holdings were reduced by about $2.4
billion over the intermeeting period.
Temporary reserve transactions followed an even more
checkered course over the period, responding to a variety of factors.
Through October 27, the Desk was in the market more often than not to
drain reserves through short-term matched sale-purchase transactions.
This pattern was interrupted for a few days after the October 13 stock
plunge, however, when reserves were added through some moderate-sized
repurchase transactions, in part because press coverage had built up
substantial market expectations of System largesse that we were
reluctant to disappoint in toto. 
A further reason for RP
accommodation then was a concern that the San Francisco earthquake
might disrupt the normal activity of some major funds suppliers.
After returning to temporary reserve withdrawals from October 19 to
27, the Desk again switched to arranging repurchase agreements as the
debt limit ramifications caused reserve shortages and financing
stringencies. 
Further temporary reserve injections were arranged as
noted earlier, on November 6 and 7, to establish the Committee's
slightly easier policy stance, while temporary withdrawals of reserves
were undertaken in the last few days to head off possible over-
interpretation of the System's move and deal with unexpected changes
in reserve factors.
Most market interest rates declined during the intermeeting
interval, responding to the mixed but preponderantly soft business
news, and the System's two small easing steps. 
Congestion reflecting
delays in debt-ceiling legislation, augmented by enlarged supply, put
some upward pressure on bill rates, so that shorter bills were down
only about 15 to 35 basis points over the period, considerably less
than the decline in funds rates and closely related financing costs.
The congestion was most acute at the end of October when the Treasury
accelerated the payment for weekly bills and stuffed in a modest cash
management bill in order to pack its coffers to the maximum allowed by
soon-to-expire debt limit authority. 
The Treasury sold its 3- and 6-
month bills yesterday at average rates of 7.68 and 7.51 percent
respectively, down from 7.83 and 7.92 percent just before the last
Committee meeting. Part way through the period, just after the sharp
jump in stock prices, bill rates had dropped much lower in a temporary
flight-to-quality; with three-month bills briefly as low as 7 percent.
Meantime, the Treasury raised about $20 billion in the bill market,
including a $10 billion cash management bill auctioned last Friday.
Rates on private money market instruments were down somewhat more than
those on short-term Treasury issues--roughly 40-60 basis points.
One-year bills and intermediate-term Treasury coupon issues
(out to about five years in maturity) were down about 50-60 basis
points in yield for the period. Longer-term Treasury issues were down
a more moderate 30-40 basis points--still an appreciable move for that
sector of the market. 
It was the more noteworthy given the increased
supplies in that sector. 
The Treasury raised about $16 billion in
coupon issues over the period, including $10 billion from the
quarterly refunding for which the final auction was held earlier this
afternoon. 
In addition, there were sizable issues of fairly closely
competitive high grade agency issues by TVA and REFCORP.
Delays and subsequent congestion of issuance probably cost
the Treasury something in the very short-term area. 
A crude estimate
might put the added cost of the bills for which payment was
accelerated to October 31 at about 10 basis points or $6 million. The
delays and re-schedulings of coupon issues, while a source of great
irritation, not to say disgust, to the markets, are harder to pin down
in cost terms. 
For a longer-term issue, of course, each added basis
point has a much greater impact than in the bill area--one estimate
places added costs in the current coupon refunding at about $45
million per basis point--but it's hard to show that many basis points
were added. 
To be sure, once the new auction schedule was finally
announced after the debt limit was raised, the sense of heavy supply
and curtailed when-issued trading did appear to have some upward yield
impact. 
On the other side, the auction delays may have saved the
Treasury a bit as rates were in an over-all downtrend--though of
course this happenstance would be no excuse for the disruptive impact
of the debt ceiling.
I referred a moment ago to the REFCORP issue. That $4.5
billion auction of 30-year bonds went quite well at a 28 basis point
spread over long Treasuries. 
In light to modest secondary market
activity, the spread has narrowed slightly to about 25 or 26 basis
points, possibly reflecting the reduction of tradable supply through
stripping activity. 
While the market has warmed up to REFCORP as an
acceptable issuer, given its strong Treasury backing, my impression is
that many in the market remain skeptical about whether the currently
envisaged dimensions of the thrift industry rescue program will prove
adequate.
On a different front, I should mention that the declining
yield trend for Treasury and other high-grade issues did not extend to
the lower quality issues. 
At times, the pressures on "junk" bonds
brought markets in those issues to a standstill, with particular
problems for some issues financing leveraged buy-outs saddled with
seemingly excessive demands on cash flow. 
In recent days, investors
have returned to the buy side for what are regarded as the better
quality "junk" issues, while letting other issues languish.
-7-
Right now, the market is just completing the delayed Treasury
quarterly refunding, leaving some supply still to be digested. 
The
mood in the high-grade fixed-income markets is fairly up-beat as the
economy is seen as more likely to sag than be re-invigorated in the
next quarter or two--probably permitting some further easing steps for
policy. Few say they see recession as likely, but few totally dismiss
the possibility either.
Leeway: 
Mr. Chairman, current projections suggest sizable reserve
needs between now and the next Committee meeting on December 18-19,
largely due to seasonal expansion of currency in circulation. 
The
normal $6 billion intermeeting leeway may be just barely adequate, but
to be on the safe side I recommend a $2 billion increase in the
standard intermeeting leeway to $8 billion.
MICHAEL J. PRELL
November 14, 1989
FOMC BRIEFING -- ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
As you know, our forecast this month bears a striking
resemblance to that presented at the last meeting of the Committee.
Judging by the tenor of comments made at the conference call last week,
the question of the moment might be why the staff's projection hasn't
changed -- more particularly, why we haven't talked more in terms of
possible recession.
I might note that, for some time now, we have been indicating
that growth in the economy might become quite slow by early 1990. And,
indeed, we have said that, given such a basic trajectory, a quarter or
two of negative numbers couldn't be ruled out. Admittedly, we indicated
that this weakness probably would emerge in an environment of interest
rates considerably above current levels. But we also didn't anticipate
that the dollar would be as strong as it has been, giving us lower
inflation this year but weaker net exports prospectively than we earlier
projected.
So, recognizing that our crystal ball has proven fallible, it
is appropriate to focus some attention on the "risks" that events may
deviate significantly from what we've forecast. 
I propose to do that by
running through the forecast sector by sector.
First, consumption. Consumers supply a good bit of the near-
term momentum in our projection for the economy. In recent months, real
income growth has been strong, sentiment indexes have remained high, and
-2-
liquid asset holdings have risen rapidly. This all bodes well for
spending, apart from the payback for the third-quarter spurt in car
sales.
This morning we received the advance report on retail sales for
October. Total sales were down one percent, but excluding autos and
building materials, there was a gain of 0.1 percent. There also were
upward revisions to this sub-aggregate in August and September,
providing a considerably higher jumping-off point for the current
quarter. Overall, this very preliminary October reading suggests a
little weaker growth this period than we had anticipated -- but with the
crucial Christmas season still ahead.
New car sales for the first 10 days of November are being
released this afternoon. With the caveats that full data are not in
yet, and that corrections are possible, it looks like sales of domestic
cars ran at about a 5.6 million unit annual rate on BEA seasonals and
6.5 million on our seasonals. Either number would suggest that sales
are not up to the current assembly schedules. Those schedules point to
pretty steady production, on a quarterly average basis, through the
winter. The Big Three evidently have set aside sizable promotional
budgets for this model year, and I think they will make a serious
attempt to move sales closer to their build plans.
Of course, we should not forget that services today account for
about half of consumer spending (and thus about one-third of GNP).
We've built into our near-term forecast a continuation of fairly strong
growth in service outlays, on the simple notion that, until income
trends and consumer sentiment weaken appreciably, there is no reason to
expect a significant change in spending patterns.
What about residential construction? The drop in starts and
new home sales in September did give us some pause. We are inclined to
discount those numbers, but not entirely. We have lowered the path of
starts in our forecast, and at a 1.38 million unit rate for the next
several quarters, our projection is for only a mild pickup from the
third-quarter average.
Uncertainties abound in this sector, and the fact that
conditions today vary so greatly from locale to locale makes it
difficult to pinpoint the aggregate trends. With interest rates on
fixed-rate loans back in single digits again and in the lower part of
the range for this decade, and with home sales up considerably on
average in recent months, I think there is definitely an upside risk to
the forecast. I get especially nervous in this regard when our forecast
is weaker than that of the homebuilders' association.
But, on the other side of the ledger, there still is an
overhang of supply in some parts of the country, adjustable-rate loans
don't generally carry the kinds of teasers they used to, and tighter
regulation -- not to mention the closing of some lending institutions --
may well have made construction credit less abundant. Whether we have
appropriately balanced all these considerations, only time will tell.
In the business sector, too, there is no shortage of
uncertainties. The Boeing strike is distorting the near-term numbers,
but fundamentally we are projecting a decided deceleration of fixed
investment, based on trends in contracts and orders and in corporate
-4-
cash flow. Apart from the fact that downturns in orders have proved
transitory on several occasions in this expansion, a particular upside
risk to our forecast might lie in the area of computer spending. Orders
for office machines were up strongly this summer, and some analysts
believe we may be on the verge of another major upswing in sales, with a
new generation of incredibly powerful microcomputers and improved
mainframes. Given the Commerce Department's deflators, a little
computer spending goes a long way in real GNP.
On the downside, the financial strains afflicting a good many
companies, the continuing overhang of commercial space, and the emerging
excess capacity in some basic industries all raise the specter of a more
significant contraction in investment.
As regards inventories, stock-to-sales ratios generally don't
look alarming: 
They rarely do, until spending takes an unanticipated
dip. Fortunately, neither the orders data nor other available
information suggest that businesses have been basing their plans on
wildly optimistic sales expectations. I suspect that if there is a
downside risk at this point, it may be in manufacturing. The aggregate
factory stocks-to-shipments ratio looks low, but it stopped falling a
year ago; this is a bit troubling because firms have ongoing efforts to
streamline operations so as to reduce inventory requirements. Moreover,
incentives to hold stocks of materials have diminished this year, as
availability has improved and prices have turned down, especially for
metals.
We've forecast modest rates of inventory investment, but things
conceivably could be weaker than we've anticipated. On the other hand,
a major liquidation doesn't seem to be in the offing, and of course, if
final demands should outstrip our expectations, there would be the
distinct possibility that the strengthening would be reinforced by
greater inventory investment.
I shall skip over the considerable uncertainties attending the
outlook for net exports, leaving that for Ted, and turn to the
government sectors.
Despite the current legislative mess on the 1990 budget, I
think we have a reasonable handle on the general direction of federal
spending. It is fairly clear that the pace of defense procurement is
trending lower, and that, despite the hiring of Census takers over the
next several months, overall, the federal sector won't be a source of
major impetus to aggregate demand.
The state and local sector is a somewhat murkier matter. We've
forecast moderate growth of real purchases. There is a strong demand
for spending in such areas as education, law enforcement, and basic
infrastructure, and just how much of this demand will be translated into
outlays isn't clear. The sector's budget position looks like a
constraint, but there have been periods of persistent and sizable
deficit when governmental units financed investment with bonds. For the
very near term, perhaps one of the notable imponderables is the
dimensions of the spending that will flow from the recent natural
disasters; we've built in a small spurt, but I'll be interested in
getting views of Presidents Black and Parry on this.
Summing up, then, we believe we've put together a forecast that
balances the upside and downside risks for real activity. Obviously,
however, when your central tendency is as low as 1-1/2 percent, your
standard error realistically encompasses zero or even somewhat less.
That said, one might reasonably argue that the more important
divide in economic growth rates is not zero, but rather the level
consistent with stability in resource utilization. As you know, we've
continued to shape our projection around the premise that some increase
in slack will be needed to achieve the Committee's objective of lower
inflation. Since there has been no material change in our forecast in
this regard, I shall not dwell on the question. Suffice it to say that
the incoming CPI and PPI figures have not been more favorable overall
than we had expected, and the new data on wages and total compensation
give no evidence of a remission of labor cost pressures.
Let me now turn the floor over to Ted.
E.M.Truman
November 14, 1989
FOMC PRESENTATION -- INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
As with the overall staff forecast, our outlook on
the external side has not changed fundamentally from those we
have presented at recent FOMC meetings. We continue to
project that real growth abroad will proceed in 1990 and 1991
at a somewhat faster pace on average than growth in the
United States, helping to boost the growth of our exports
relative to imports.
We also continue to project that inflation in the
major foreign industrial countries will decline somewhat in
1990 and 1991 under the influence of the monetary restraint
we have seen to date and the currency appreciation we are
projecting for the future. The result is that inflation in
these countries is projected to average between one half to
one percentage point less than in the United States.
We also continue to project a moderate decline of
the dollar over the forecast period. In light of the
depreciation of the dollar from late September to early
November, we have reduced slightly our projection of the rate
of decline of the dollar to reach the same endpoint as in the
last forecast. Nevertheless, the dollar's course, everything
else being equal, remains a source of risk and uncertainty in
our forecast: 
A weaker dollar would produce more inflation
pressures and real demand, and vice versa.
-
2 -
Our basic forecast is for essentially no change on
balance over the next year or so in the U.S. current account
position from the roughly $115 billion at an annual rate that
we are now projecting for the second half of 1989. 
In 1991,
we are projecting a moderate improvement in the deficit, but
it is expected to remain at more than $100 billion at an
annual rate. 
In terms of the GNP accounts, the external
sector is expected to make little in the way of a statistical
contribution to real growth on balance over the next few
quarters, but by the end of 1990, the dollar's projected
depreciation is expected to begin to boost real net exports
of goods and services.
In the near term, our outlook for the external
accounts is affected by an unusually large number of special
factors, such as the Boeing strike, the bulge in the quantity
of oil imports in the third quarter, and a bulge in
agricultural shipments to the Soviet Union this quarter.
We also are expecting an impact on our external accounts
because of a pickup in gold shipments out of official
holdings at the FRBNY. While this will not affect the GNP
accounts (which exclude such transactions), it will affect
Census trade reports by boosting exports but not imports. On
balance, these factors will tend for the next 6-9 months to
increase the difficulty of discerning underlying trends.
All that having been said, three features of our
outlook deserve further comment. First, the revised July
data and the August data on nominal merchandise trade
-
3 -
revealed primarily a rate of importation of non-oil goods
that was larger than anticipated, largely consisting of
consumer goods and machinery. We have considered the
implications of this information and have concluded that, in
part, it reflects the composition of domestic demand in the
quarter that we had not fully appreciated. However, this
information has also led us to trim somewhat our optimism
about the future course of non-oil imports, leading us to
boost somewhat the strength of such imports, ceteris paribus.
If in fact these data are the first installment on a stronger
underlying trend in imports, this suggests a downside risk
to our forecast.
Second, we have received information on prices of
both imports and exports in the third quarter: both were
lower than we had forecast earlier. Part of our problem of
interpretation and forecasting in this area relates to new
procedures and data sources used by the Commerce Department.
We have incorporated this information into our forecast, but
since the surprise was larger on the export side, our
revisions in real exports of goods and services because of
this information have offset in part our revisions in the
nominal balances because of the stronger non-oil imports.
Third, we have not taken account of recent events in
central Europe, at least not on the scale that seems now to
be developing. Without pretending to offer a complete
analysis of the implications of these events for the U.S.
economy, since they almost surely will involve non-economic
-
4 -
factors in which economists do not have a comparative
advantage, I would offer three comments. First, in the very
short run Bundesbank policy is likely to be constrained
somewhat by the increased economic and political uncertainty;
in other words, I would attach a much lower probability to a
further tightening of Bundesbank policy over the next several
months. Second, over the next year or so, I would expect
somewhat higher German growth and inflation than is embodied
in the Greenbook forecast along with higher nominal if not
real interest rates. While this is not likely to be a strong
enough factor to change the forecast's basic shape, it is a
source of upside risk. Third, over the longer run extending
beyond our forecast period, I would agree with the
widespread expectations noted by Sam Cross, that these events
will contribute importantly to the competitiveness of the
West German economy as it draws upon an eager, expanding
supply of skilled labor.
November 14, 1989
FOMC Briefing
Donald L. Kohn
The key issue facing the Committee is balancing concerns about
the strength of the economy in the shorter run with the desire to make
some longer-term progress against inflation. The judgments are par-
ticularly difficult since the latter is likely to involve a period of
somewhat slower economic growth than we have experienced in recent
years, but presumably need not entail a recession. These issues will be
explored in depth at the next FOMC meeting in the context of the 5-year
timetable in the Neal resolution. Today, I thought it might be useful
to review the recent behavior of some of the financial variables
included in your chart package to see how they reflect the easing in
policy since last June and what kind of clues they may be giving for the
kind of path we may be on for the economy and prices over the next year
or so.
The first chart illustrates movements in the yield curve. The
lower panel shows substantial declines throughout the maturity spectrum
since the last meeting, except in the bill area, which was affected by
short-run supply pressures. This movement suggests a general downward
shift in expectations about future interest rates, likely spurred by a
sense that the economy was weaker than anticipated and that the Federal
Reserve might be a bit more aggressive in countering any incipient weak-
ness. A similar pattern of roughly comparable declines in both short-
and long-term rates since the peaks of late winter has resulted in only
a minor change in the difference between federal funds and bond yields,
the upper panel of the chart.
-2-
The curve remains slightly inverted, with some small decline
expected in the federal funds rate in coming months. This decline is in
the context of an essentially flat yield curve--much flatter than before
the last several recessions. Expectations of little change in nominal
interest rates imply that markets probably see real rates as being close
to long-term equilibrium levels, so that neither real rates or inflation
rates are expected to vary significantly from recent levels. 
The notion
of stable expected inflation rates is reinforced by the long-term Trea-
sury bond at nearly 8 percent; with equilibrium real rates probably
between 3 and 4 percent, that nominal yield implies inflation staying in
the 4 to 5 percent area.
Unfortunately, inflation expectations and real rates are not
observable. The next chart gives a few measures of the one-year real
rate using alternative measures of inflation expectations. With recent
inflation having been damped, backward looking measures, such as used in
the top chart, show rising real rates. Yet such survey data as we have
indicate that people are looking through the last few months of data and
continuing to expect inflation in the neighborhood of 4-1/2 percent over
the next year. Expected inflation is down from earlier this year, how-
ever, damping to some extent the degree to which the drop in nominal
rates has shown through to real rates. 
On balance, judging from the
lower two panels, policy easing has produced some decline in real rates
from early 1989, suggesting less restraint on the economy, but has left
them above the low levels of late 1986 and early 1988, which were
-3-
associated with a subsequent increase in pressures on resources and
potential acceleration of inflation.
The drop in real rates has been echoed most recently in the
real exchange rate--the lower panel of the next chart--though on balance
this rate is little changed from this spring. As a consequence, the
easing of policy is likely to have less effect on aggregate demand than
one associated with an appreciable dollar decline, such as in 1985 and
1986. Moreover, to the extent the very recent decline in the real value
of the dollar was spurred by tighter policy abroad, its effect on
demands for US goods and services will be somewhat muted as compared to
a dollar decline that resulted from U.S. policy ease alone.
The behavior of stock prices, illustrated in real terms in the
top panel, represents something of a mixed picture. The recent decline,
along with the problems in the junk bond market, indicate a more sober
outlook for earnings, perhaps reflecting a downward revision in expected
growth of output and sales. Yet, stock prices have advanced substan-
tially on balance this year, and are at a level that still would seem to
imply that earnings aren't expected to collapse, and that the rate being
used to discount future earnings is not excessively high.
As can be seen in the lower panel of the next chart, prices of
certain commodities also dropped most recently. In particular, prices
of industrial materials have fallen, suggesting a weakening in demand.
The broader commodity price indices, however, have shown little net
movement since this spring.
Money growth, shown in the next chart, has clearly reflected
the easing of policy. M2 growth has gone from about 1-1/2 percent in
the first half of the year to a projected 7-1/2 percent pace in the
second half. The acceleration is largely a consequence of the turn-
around in opportunity costs--from rising through the spring, to falling
thereafter--which has been mirrored in a swing from rising to falling
velocity. As can be seen, M2 would be expected to run around the upper
end of its tentative range early in next year as velocity continued to
decline under the impetus of the recent drop in interest rates. The 50
basis point policy easing undertaken since the last FOMC meeting prob-
ably added close to half a percentage point to M2 growth over 1990, with
the bulk of this boost occurring in the first half of the year. M2
growth moderates thereafter as interest rates subsequently begin to move
higher in the staff forecast and the more moderate pace of expansion of
nominal income persists. At this time, we would project M2 growth for
1990 well within its tentative target range and moderating further in
1991.
M3 growth, the lower panel, has been damped by the shakeout in
the thrift industry. Further retrenchment of thrifts, reflected in an
overall shift of intermediation away from depositories, is expected to
raise M3 velocity through 1991. Growth of this aggregate is expected to
pick up next year, but to a little below the middle of its tentative
range, and to continue to expand at a relatively modest 5 percent pace
in 1991.
The next two charts examine the consistency of the recent and
projected money growth paths with the slow economic growth and steady
inflation outlook of the greenbook forecast. 
In chart 6, M2 and M3 are
deflated and their growth averaged over four quarters. The tightening
of policy in 1988 and 1989 along with the thrift crisis have produced
declines in real money growth in 1989. Although dips in real money
growth since the 1960s have been associated with recessions, the current
decreases, taken together, are shorter and shallower than in previous
episodes. Moreover, the rebounds shown would occur even if growth in
the aggregates fell somewhat short of their projected rates for the
first half of 1990.
The next chart assesses the inflation implications of recent
and projected money growth through the P* model. As can be seen in the
upper panel, the strengthening of money growth as a consequence of the
easier policy keeps P* very close to P, suggesting that 7 percent M2
growth for a time is not consistent with much, if any, disinflation,
given the equilibrium velocity and potential GNP assumptions of the
model. The slight downward tilt to the inflation rate, seen in the
lower panel, is produced by the slower M2 growth later in 1990 and 1991.
In the context of the model, the current configuration of P* close to P
can be seen as the product of countercyclical monetary policy in the
last two years. On the one hand, the economy is producing beyond its
long-run potential, which tends to elevate P* above P and result in
accelerating inflation. On the other, efforts by the Federal Reserve to
tighten policy last year to head off developing inflation pressures has
left velocity above its long-run level, holding down P* and inflation.
Within the confines of the P* model, as well as within the staff green-
book forecast, so long as the economy remains near, if not beyond, its
potential, a desire to make progress on inflation allows limited scope
for policy ease, additional growth in money balances, and associated
velocity declines. Indeed, money growth probably is going to need to
decelerate appreciably at some point if the Federal Reserve is to
succeed in moving to price stability. What such a money path might
involve under various assumptions and circumstances will be the subject
of the presentation at the December meeting.
Let me conclude by stressing a refrain running through my ear-
lier comments: 
none of these indicators can be accurately interpreted
in isolation from each other or from underlying forces in the economy.
Moreover, they interact in complex ways with what we do and what the
markets expect us to do. Taken together, however, they do seem to show
some effective easing of policy since the spring, cushioning to an
extent a drop in demand for goods and services and associated financing,
which is also reflected in the data. Some slowing in the economy was
inevitable and desirable, given escalating pressures on limited
resources in 1988. 
In general, the configuration of rates and prices in
financial markets and the recent pace of liquidity expansion do not
suggest a high risk of a recession. But neither do they seem to point
to an appreciable easing of inflation pressures over the next year or
so.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II-FOMC
Financial Indicators
November 14, 1989
Chart 1
The Yield Curve
Spread Between 30-year T-Bond Yield and Federal Funds Rate*
Quarterly Data
Percentage Points
PT
P 
T
PT P 
T
1957 
1961 
1965 
1969 
1973 
1977 
1981 
1985 
1989
Selected Treasury Yield Curves
Percent
October 3, 1989
November 13, 1989
30-year
3-month 
1 0-year
*Spread between the 20-year Treasury constant maturity and the federal funds rate prior to 1977:Q2.
Beginning In 1977:Q2, the 30-year Treasury constant maturity 
is 
used.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Chart 2
Short-Term Real Interest Rates
1-year T-Bill Minus Change in the CPI From Three Months Prior
Percent
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989
1-year T-Bill Minus 1-year Inflation Expectations (Michigan)
Percent
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989
1-year T-Bill Minus 1-year Inflation Expectations (Hoey)
Percent
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989
NOTE: Hoey Survey is not available prior to June 1983.
+ Denotes most recent weekly T-bill less 
most recent Inflation expectation.
Chart 3
Stock Indices and Exchange Value of the Dollar (Real Measures)
Monthly Standard and Poor's Stock Index
Index Level (Deflated)
300
+
250
200
150
Monthly G-10 Index
Index Level (Deflated)
160
140
120
100
80
60
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989
+ Denotes most recent weeldy deflated value
Chart 4
Experimental Price Index for 21 Commodities(Weekly)
ALL COMMODITIES
Index, 1986 Q1-100
1986
1982 
1983 
1984
ALL COMMODITIES EX. CRUDE OIL
1987
1988
1989
Index, 1986 01=100
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985
ALL COMMODITIES EX. FOOD and CRUDE OIL
1986
1987
1988
1989
Index, 1986 01=100
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987
1982 
1983
1988 
1989
Chart 5
Billions of Dollars
Actual Level
- - - -
- Projected Level
Q4-Q4 Growth Rate
(percent)
1989 
4-1/2
1990 
6
1991 
5
1989 
1990 
1991
3600
3500
3400
3300
3200
3100
3000
Billions of Dollars
4500
Actual Level
------- 
Projected Level
3.5%
Q4-Q4 Growth Rate
(percent)
1989 
3-3/4
3.5%
1990 
5
1991 
5
4100
4000
3900
3800
4400
4300
4200
1989
1990
1991
Chart 6
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Percent
1959 
1962 
1965 
1968 
1971 
1974 
1977 
1980 
1983 
1986 
1989
M3
Percent
1959 
1962 
1965 
1968 
1971 
1974 
1977 
1980 
1983 
1986 
1989
NOTE: Four-quarter moving average deflated by the CPL
Chart 7
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Ratio scale
- Current price level (P)
--------- Long-run equilibrium price level
given current M2 (P*)
= Inflation
I I
1961
1967
1973
1979
1985
Percent
12
9
6
3
1991
1 Change in GNP implicit deflator over the previous four quarters.
Note: Vertical lines mark crossing of P and P*.
For 1989:Q4 to 1991:Q4 P* is based on the staff M2 forecast and P is
simulated using the price gap model developed by Hallman, Porter and Small.
1955
