The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
April 18, 2018 
April 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas based 
on information collected on or before April 9, 2018. This document 
summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal 
Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal 
Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest to moderate pace across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts in March 
and early April. Outlooks remained positive, but contacts in various sectors including manufacturing, agriculture, and 
transportation expressed concern about the newly imposed and/or proposed tariffs. Consumer spending rose in most 
regions, with gains noted for nonauto retail sales and tourism, but mixed results for vehicle sales. Manufacturing activity 
grew moderately, and demand for nonfinancial services was mostly solid. Residential construction and real estate 
activity expanded further, although low home inventories continued to constrain sales in several Districts. Loan demand 
increased, and commercial real estate activity and construction improved since the last report. Transportation services 
activity expanded in over half of the reporting Districts, buoyed by increases in port traffic and/or air, rail and/or trucking 
shipments. Agricultural conditions were little changed or worsened on net, in part due to persistent drought conditions. 
Contacts in the energy sector cited a pickup in activity, except in the Richmond District, where coal production was flat 
and natural gas production dipped slightly.  
Employment and Wages 
Widespread employment growth continued, with most Districts characterizing growth as modest to moderate. Labor 
markets across the country remained tight, restraining job gains in some regions. Contacts continued to note difficulty 
finding qualified candidates across a broad array of industries and skill levels. Reports of labor shortages over the 
reporting period were most often cited in high-skill positions, including engineering, information technology, and health 
care, as well as in construction and transportation. Businesses were responding to labor shortages in a variety of ways, 
from raising pay to enhancing training to increasing their use of overtime and/or automation, among other strategies. 
Upward wage pressures persisted but generally did not escalate; most Districts reported wage growth as only modest. 
Prices 
Prices increased across all Districts, generally at a moderate pace. There were widespread reports that steel prices 
rose, sometimes dramatically, due to the new tariff.  Prices for building materials continued to rise briskly, especially for 
lumber, drywall, and concrete. Transportation costs also generally rose, with contacts citing higher fuel prices and 
shortages of truck drivers as the primary causes. There were scattered reports of companies successfully passing 
through price increases to customers in manufacturing, information technology, transportation, and construction. Busi-
nesses generally anticipate further price increases in the months ahead, particularly for steel and building materials. 
Boston 
Revenues and sales were moderately higher than a year 
earlier at almost all contacted retailers, manufacturers, 
and software and IT services firms. Most commercial 
real estate markets recorded positive results; residential 
markets continued to see inventory shortages and rising 
median prices. Business sector respondents’ outlooks 
remained positive. 
 
New York 
Economic activity grew at a modest pace, while labor 
markets have remained tight. Input price pressures have 
persisted, and selling price increases have picked up 
somewhat. Housing markets and commercial real estate 
markets have been steady to slightly softer. 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to grow at a modest pace, in 
particular for nonauto retail sales, tourism, nonfinancial 
services, and nonresidential leasing. Manufacturing 
accelerated to a moderate pace, while existing home 
sales declined. Auto sales continued to decline, while 
construction activity was flat. On balance, employment, 
wages, and prices continued to grow modestly.  
Cleveland 
The District economy expanded at a moderate pace. 
Labor markets tightened, with wage pressures noted 
broadly. Rising commodities prices and transportation 
costs are pressuring goods producers. Stronger confi-
dence in the economy supported rising demand in manu-
facturing, retail, and nonfinancial services. Construction 
activity remained robust. 
Richmond 
The regional economy expanded at a moderate rate. 
Ports and trucking firms continued to report robust activi-
ty but faced capacity constraints. As a result, manufac-
turers faced longer delivery times and, in some cases, 
began stockpiling raw materials. Prices grew moderately, 
overall, but steel and aluminum prices rose sharply and 
were expected to rise further as a result of the tariffs.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity increased modestly. Contacts contin-
ued to report difficulties filling positions in high-demand/
high-growth sectors. Many contacts noted steady but 
modest wage pressures. Overall, nonlabor input costs 
were subdued. Retail sales were stable. Manufacturers 
noted an increase in new orders and production. District 
bankers reported solid commercial and consumer loan 
growth. 
Chicago 
Growth in economic activity remained at a moderate 
pace. Employment, consumer spending, and manufac-
turing production increased moderately, and business 
spending and construction and real estate activity grew 
slightly. Wages and prices increased modestly and 
financial conditions improved slightly on balance. Income 
prospects for the agricultural sector improved a bit. 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions continued to improve at a modest 
pace. District bankers reported an increase in lending 
activity driven by robust commercial and industrial loan 
growth. Some steel and aluminum manufacturers an-
nounced plans to reopen facilities and call back workers. 
District acreage for the four major crops for the year is 
expected to be the same as in 2017. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew moderately. Em-
ployment grew modestly even as hiring demand was 
robust, due to tight labor supply. Wages grew moderate-
ly, as did prices overall, but price pressures at the whole-
sale level appeared to accelerate. While growth was 
noted across sectors, activity in professional services, 
energy, and mining was particularly strong. 
Kansas City 
Overall economic activity in the Tenth District increased 
moderately, with further growth expected in coming 
months. Manufacturing, energy, and consumer spending 
activity expanded at a moderate pace, while real estate 
and business services activity grew modestly. Agricultur-
al conditions remained weak, while District employment 
and wages rose modestly. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately, with a rebound in 
retail sales and an acceleration in financial and nonfinan-
cial services activity. Robust expansion in the energy 
industry continued, while growth in manufacturing eased 
somewhat. Hiring was solid despite a tight labor market, 
and wage and price growth remained elevated. Numer-
ous contacts expressed concern about new tariffs and 
trade policy uncertainty, although outlooks overall were 
still positive. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Sales of retail goods were 
down slightly, and growth in the consumer and business 
services sectors remained solid. Conditions in the manu-
facturing sector picked up modestly. Activity in residen-
tial real estate markets remained strong, and conditions 
in the commercial real estate sector were solid. Lending 
activity ticked up. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to expand at a moderate pace in the First District, with almost all retail, manufacturing, and 
software and information technology services respondents citing year-over-year increases in sales and revenues since 
the last Beige Book. Commercial real estate contacts reported mostly positive results while residential real estate mar-
kets again saw sales declines in some areas accompanied by price increases, a combination contacts attributed to very 
low inventories. With some exceptions, headcounts, wages, and prices were said to be rising modestly. Notwithstanding 
a few manufacturers’ concerns about tariffs, outlooks remained generally positive. 
Employment and Wages  
Selective net hiring continued; contacts said wages were 
rising, but not steeply. With one exception, responding 
retailers are hiring or planning to hire new workers, 
mainly due to business expansion. Some restaurants 
and regional chambers of commerce have been proac-
tive in trying to attract foreign workers to fill positions 
during the summer tourist season. All but two manufac-
turing contacts reported flat employment; firms were 
hiring, but largely for replacement. Nonetheless, several 
respondents reported the labor market was extremely 
tight; skilled workers continued to be in short supply and 
one contact said that they were having trouble finding 
“moderately skilled labor needed to manage the mostly 
automated production equipment.” Software and IT 
services contacts were planning on zero to 5 percent 
increases in headcount during 2018 and expressed 
concern with the tight labor market for technically skilled 
workers such as engineers. Regarding wages, one 
retailer said it had to pay higher starting wages in New 
Hampshire, which has the region’s lowest unemployment 
rate, than elsewhere in New England. Wages in the 
region’s software sector increased 3 percent to 5 percent 
across the board.  
Prices  
Many respondents cited modest to moderate price in-
creases; a few noted steeper jumps. While other vendor 
prices were reportedly steady, two retail contacts indicat-
ed that food prices were starting to increase. A Massa-
chusetts restaurant-industry contact reported that menu 
prices were up about 2.6 percent over the year because 
of higher labor and food costs. Manufacturing contacts 
reported flat or slightly increasing prices for both the 
goods they buy and the goods they sell. One manufac-
turer and one retailer said that shipping costs were rising 
rapidly, which both attributed to a shortage of truck driv-
ers. Two software and IT services firms were able to 
pass through price increases without any backlash; an 
online backup company increased prices on individuals 
by as much as 20 percent. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retailers consulted for this round reported that between 
late February and early April, year-over-year comparable
-store sales results were positive, with gains ranging 
from 1 percent to 5 percent. Most noted that multiple 
severe winter storms in the northeast dampened sales—
one contact calculated that in the absence of weather 
disruptions, this period’s results would have been 1.5 
percentage points higher than the 2.5 percent reported. 
A Massachusetts restaurant-industry contact reported 
that business was up about 2.5 percent year-over-year. 
Retail contacts regarded the outlook for 2018 as positive 
based on currently high levels of consumer sentiment. 
A contact in the Connecticut auto industry reported that 
vehicle sales in the state were softer than the nation’s, 
possibly because the state’s employment and population 
growth have been weak. Nonetheless, given Connecti-
cut’s generous incentives, electric vehicle sales have 
continued to rise. 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of seven firms contacted this cycle, only one reported a 
year-over-year decline in sales and four reported higher 
sales versus the same period a year ago. A furniture 
maker said that sales were up 25 percent versus the 
same period a year earlier, a major turnaround from 
years of weak sales growth which they attribute to “an 
improved emphasis on marketing.” One of the other 
firms reporting higher sales, a textile and chemical man-
ufacturer, indicated sales had fallen over the last twelve 
weeks but were still up versus the period one year earli-
er. Two contacts reported flat sales versus a year earlier, 
both for idiosyncratic reasons; for example, a producer of 
frozen fish attributed their flat sales to Lent occurring 
earlier than usual. A toy and game manufacturer report-
ed lower sales due to the liquidation of a major toy retail-
er, which they see as a temporary setback. No contacts 
revised their capital expenditure plans recently.  
In general, respondents were optimistic in their outlook. 
However, two contacts brought up the proposed China 
tariffs and said they represent a major risk. One was a 
toy manufacturer who sources 75 percent of their pro-
duction from China. The second said that punitive tariffs 
on Chinese aluminum had already had a big effect: “Thin 
gauge foil” is produced only in China and tariffs raised 
the price three-fold; the contact argued that “these tariffs 
are now killing high-paying American manufacturing jobs 
and businesses.” 
Software and Information Technology Services  
The software and IT services sector continued to be 
healthy in the first quarter. Revenues at contacted firms 
grew 1 percent to 10 percent year-over-year in the first 
quarter. Demand was strong for cloud-based solutions, 
healthcare and industrial IT software, and enterprise 
software for building apps. Contacts did not note signifi-
cant changes in the costs they were facing aside from 
labor. The overall outlook was positive. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Reports from First District commercial real estate con-
tacts were mixed, but positive on balance. Office leasing 
demand remained strong in Boston, especially in the 
urban core, leading to further increases in rents. Provi-
dence saw stable, healthy office leasing activity and 
modest upward pressure on rents. Office leasing re-
mained slow in the Portland area and weakened further 
in Hartford. Industrial and warehouse space enjoyed 
robust demand in most of the First District, with the 
exception of Connecticut. A Portland contact reported 
that industrial rents in that city increased 20 percent from 
a year ago in response to demand from diverse users 
including small manufacturers, while a Boston contact 
said that demand for retail fulfillment centers had driven 
up industrial rents in the Boston metro area.  
Nonetheless, contacts say that both industrial and office 
construction have been restrained by the fact that build-
ing costs remain high relative to rents. Multifamily apart-
ment construction was expected to slow moving forward 
amid slower or flat rent growth in most areas. By con-
trast, condominium development activity increased in 
both Boston and Portland. Investment sales activity was 
stable at a slow to modest pace depending on location. 
Two Boston contacts perceived small increases in capi-
talization rates for office properties that were seen as 
consistent with increases in interest rates. Commercial 
real estate contacts were optimistic on balance. 
Residential Real Estate 
Heading into spring, residential real estate results in the 
First District continued to reflect sellers’ markets. Closed 
sales for single family homes and for condos were up in 
Maine, Vermont, and Rhode Island, while other areas 
experienced moderate decreases. (Vermont reported 
combined results for single family homes and condos. All 
First District areas but Connecticut reported changes 
from February 2017 to February 2018; a technical issue 
caused December 2017 to be the most recent data from 
Connecticut.)  
Because of ongoing inventory shortages, all reporting 
areas but Vermont reported increases in median sale 
prices for both single family homes and condos. A con-
tact from Maine pointed out that negotiations over multi-
ple offers may be fueling higher median sale prices: 
“multiple-offer situations [are] happening on a regular 
basis, especially on properties at $250,000 or less.” 
Inventory dropped by double-digit percentages year-over
-year across all area markets. A contact in Massachu-
setts noted that “inventory is so low and demand so high 
that many low- and moderate-income home buyers are 
being left on the outside looking in.”  
Notwithstanding the prospect of rising interest rates, 
contacts cited eager buyer populations and were opti-
mistic about activity levels in coming months. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District continued to grow at a modest pace since the last report, and the labor market 
has remained tight. Input price pressures have remained widespread but do not appear to have intensified further, while 
selling prices have accelerated somewhat. Growth has picked up in the manufacturing sector but slowed in most distri-
bution and service industries. Consumer spending was mixed but still generally sluggish in March—partially attributable 
to unseasonably cold and wet weather—though tourism has shown signs of picking up. Housing markets have been 
mixed, while commercial real estate markets have been steady to slightly softer. Construction activity has been steady 
to somewhat slower. Finally, banks reported a pickup in loan demand and no change in delinquency rates.     
   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight, and hiring activity 
has been steady. One employment agency in upstate 
New York noted a seasonal pickup in hiring. A major 
New York City agency indicated that hiring has been 
robust and that it is taking longer to fill jobs, particularly 
those requiring technical skills. Businesses noted partic-
ular shortages of tech workers, truck drivers, and skilled 
tradespeople. A few contacts cited difficulties in attract-
ing young job-seekers away from major urban centers. 
Business contacts in the finance and information sectors 
reported fairly brisk hiring activity, while those in manu-
facturing, wholesale trade, education & health, and 
leisure & hospitality indicated modest hiring, on net. 
Retailers continued to report declining employment. Still, 
firms in most service industries, including retail, said they 
plan to expand hiring in the months ahead, while manu-
facturers have scaled back hiring plans.  
Businesses across all major service industries reported 
ongoing wage pressures. Some contacts maintained that 
wages had accelerated over the past year, though plans 
to raise wages in the months ahead were little changed. 
A New York City agency reports that a new law prohibit-
ing potential employers from asking about a candidate’s 
salary history has led candidates to demand higher pay.          
Prices  
Input prices have continued to rise briskly but have not 
accelerated further, according to contacts in most indus-
try sectors. Still, businesses generally anticipated further 
increases in the months ahead. A growing proportion of 
service-sector contacts indicated that they were raising 
their selling prices—most notably, wholesalers—but 
manufacturers noted only modest hikes in their prices.  
Among retailers, some contacts indicated that they have 
held prices steady, while others reported price increases. 
Prices for New York City hotel rooms and Broadway 
theater tickets picked up noticeably in March. Looking 
ahead, a growing proportion of businesses in manufac-
turing and wholesale trade said that they planned to 
raise their prices, while most retailers did not foresee any 
significant price hikes.     
Consumer Spending 
Retail contacts reported that sales have picked up some-
what in recent weeks but are still considered lackluster, 
reflecting unseasonably cold and wet weather. Retailers 
in upstate New York indicated that sales have strength-
ened but remained fairly subdued, despite strong cus-
tomer traffic. A major retail chain noted that sales ad-
vanced in March, running somewhat ahead of plan and 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
up modestly from a year ago. Inventories were generally 
reported to be at satisfactory levels, and retailers were 
moderately optimistic about the near-term outlook.  
New vehicle sales in upstate New York were reported to 
have weakened in February but there were some signs 
of a rebound in March. Sales of used cars were steady 
to up slightly. Vehicle inventories were said to be in fairly 
good shape. Dealers continued to characterize retail and 
wholesale credit conditions as favorable. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) edged up to a new multi-year high in March.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported some acceleration in growth 
since the last report. In contrast, wholesalers indicated a 
pause in growth, and transportation firms reported some 
decline in activity. Looking ahead, manufacturers have 
become substantially less optimistic about the near-term 
outlook, while contacts in wholesale distribution and 
transportation have remained moderately optimistic.       
Services 
Reports from service-sector firms were mixed but gener-
ally pointed to little growth in activity. Contacts in profes-
sional & business services and leisure & hospitality 
reported modest growth, while those in the information 
and health & education sectors reported flat activity. 
Service sector businesses have grown less optimistic 
about the near-term outlook, most notably in the health & 
education sector.  
Tourism in New York City has picked up since the last 
report. Hotels reported an increase in both revenues and 
occupancy rates in March. Broadway theaters indicated 
that business was sluggish in February and early March 
but picked up noticeably in the second half of the month.          
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, weaker in the latest reporting period.  
Real estate contacts in upstate New York reported that 
buyer traffic and sales activity have picked up in recent 
weeks, but that lean inventories have held back sales 
activity—especially at the lower end of the market. In 
New York City, sales of condos and co-ops have reced-
ed noticeably, while prices have edged down. One in-
dustry contact attributes this to uncertainty about the 
effects of the new federal tax law. However, housing 
markets in the areas around New York City have seen 
strong demand—while sales volume has been con-
strained by low and declining inventories, prices have 
picked up noticeably, except at the high end of the mar-
ket.  
Apartment rental markets have been mixed. Across New 
York City, vacancy rates have been steady, as landlord 
concessions have been increasingly prevalent, and 
effective rents have slipped across the board. In northern 
New Jersey and upstate New York, rents have continued 
to rise moderately, and concessions have remained fairly 
infrequent. 
Commercial real estate markets have been steady to 
slightly softer. Office markets have been steady across 
the District—while leasing activity has slowed somewhat, 
vacancy rates and asking rents have been generally flat. 
The retail market has shown further signs of slackening, 
particularly in New York City, where vacancy rates have 
risen. However, northern New Jersey’s retail vacancy 
rate edged down. In upstate New York, retail vacancies 
have been fairly stable. The industrial market has lost a 
bit of momentum but remains fairly strong. Asking rents 
have continued to rise at a fairly brisk pace throughout 
the District. Industrial vacancy rates have edged up 
across downstate New York but have continued to edge 
down in northern New Jersey and upstate New York.   
Multi-family construction activity has leveled off in north-
ern New Jersey and across upstate New York, but has 
slowed further in New York City. Office construction has 
picked up somewhat in New York City and upstate New 
York but has remained subdued elsewhere. Industrial 
construction has been steady at a fairly sturdy level.       
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium size banks in the District reported 
higher demand for residential mortgages, commercial 
mortgages, and C&I loans, and steady demand for con-
sumer loans. Banks reported lower loan spreads for 
consumer loans and residential mortgages, and no 
change in spreads across all other loan categories. 
Bankers reported that both credit standards and delin-
quency rates were unchanged across all loan categories.    
■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Manufacturing activity appeared to accelerate to a moderate pace, while nonauto retail sales, tourist activity, 
nonfinancial services, and nonresidential leasing markets grew modestly. Contacts from new home construction and 
nonresidential construction reported no change in activity. Auto sales continued to decline modestly, and existing home 
sales fell moderately. On balance, employment, wages, and prices continued to grow modestly. Contacts from various 
sectors noted that manufacturers may need to train workers and raise wages to attract and retain employees. The 
growth outlook over the next six months remained positive, with over half of all firms anticipating increases in general 
activity. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. Manufacturing and non-
manufacturing firms reported ongoing net additions to 
staff; average hours worked edged down over the period 
for manufacturing firms but rose among nonmanufactur-
ers.  
While wage growth edged higher among some contacts, 
on balance, the pace appeared to remain modest. The 
share of nonmanufacturing firms reporting increases 
broadened to over 40 percent. However, most banking 
contacts continued to note few signs of wage inflation.  
Staffing firms continued to report steady demand for 
temporary workers and direct hires in several local labor 
markets. Wage pressures continued to be higher in 
tighter markets, such as central Pennsylvania, where 
one firm reported wages rising 4 percent over the year.  
One staffing firm noted manufacturing clients’ reluctance 
to raise wage rates. Among our contacts, manufacturers 
were most likely to cite a lack of skilled labor; however, 
one contact recently said that “higher pay and good 
medical benefits help in recruiting and keeping people.” 
That contact also noted that the firm is raising prices to 
cover the cost and is running at 100 percent of practical 
capacity. Another manufacturer stated, “It's time for 
private enterprise to learn more about how to bring in 
raw talent and train up to the requirements.”  
Prices  
On balance, prices rose modestly, as most contacts 
continued to report no change in prices paid and re-
ceived. The percentage of manufacturing firms reporting 
increases edged down from the prior period for prices 
paid and for prices received for their own goods. Among 
nonmanufacturing firms, slightly more contacts noted 
increases for prices paid and received than during the 
prior period.  
Builders continued to note rising prices for construction 
materials as well as labor and noted concerns about a 
potential trade war. Contacts cited double-digit price 
hikes for lumber and drywall and expressed concern for 
steel and reinforced concrete.  
Looking ahead six months, manufacturing firms contin-
ued to anticipate higher prices, with nearly two-thirds 
expecting increases in prices paid and over half expect-
ing increases in prices received for their own goods. Of 
the 22 manufacturing firms that offered general com-
ments, seven mentioned impacts from recent tariffs or 
proposed tariffs – most noted rising prices or anticipated 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

C-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  
rising prices; just one firm anticipated greater demand. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity accelerated a bit to a 
moderate pace of growth, with more firms reporting 
increases in shipments and new orders.  
The makers of paper products, chemicals, primary and 
fabricated metal products, industrial machinery, and 
electronic equipment tended to note gains in new orders 
and shipments; no sectors noted declines. The growth 
may be partially due to seasonal trends because the 
same pattern was apparent during the same period last 
year.  
Most manufacturing contacts continued to expect gen-
eral activity to increase over the next six months; the 
percentage of firms expecting future increases remained 
between 55 percent and 60 percent. The percentage of 
firms expecting increases in future capital expenditures 
and future employment also held steady at just above 40 
percent.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales continued to grow 
modestly. Retailers were generally more positive about 
consumer demand, despite losing several shopping days 
to winter storms, including the Monday after Easter. 
Closings and consolidations of stores, brands, and malls 
appear to be boosting sales for surviving retail locations.  
Auto dealers continued to report modest declines in year
-over-year sales this period. However, sales remain at
high levels, and dealers are optimistic that the year will
end with only a slight decline.
Tourism contacts continued to report modest growth 
overall. A Delaware contact reported heavy traffic, busy 
outlets, optimistic merchants, and several new hotels in 
the planning stages. New Jersey contacts were less 
optimistic regarding the local housing rental market in 
southern beach communities. Atlantic City’s casino 
revenues fell on a year-over-year basis for a third con-
secutive month, which dampens neighboring shore 
activity.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms have continued to 
report modest growth in general activity since the prior 
Beige Book period. The percentage of firms reporting an 
increase in sales edged down, while the percentage 
reporting an increase in new orders rose. Expectations 
of future growth remained high but the percentage of 
firms anticipating increased activity slipped below 60 
percent. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report little change in overall 
loan volumes (excluding credit cards). Volumes did grow 
moderately in mortgages, commercial real estate loans, 
and commercial and industrial lending. Home equity 
lines, auto loans, and other consumer loans (not else-
where classified) fell moderately.  
Credit card lending fell further as consumers continued 
paying down holiday bills. Over the entire year, credit 
card loan volumes and total lending in all the other cate-
gories combined have grown at a moderate pace.  
Banking contacts continued to describe solid ongoing 
economic growth in most parts of the District, with high 
consumer sentiment and business confidence. Overall, 
contacts noted that credit standards remain unchanged 
and credit quality remains very sound.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported challenging weather conditions 
for construction activity and mixed reports for new con-
tracts, suggesting little overall change in activity. Single-
family detached home construction continues to give 
way to greater demand for townhomes, apartments, and 
condos.  
According to Third District brokers, ongoing low invento-
ries of houses for sale continued to constrain sales and 
place upward pressure on prices. Sales of existing 
homes fell moderately in February across most major 
markets compared with the same period last year; bro-
kers saw no signs of an improvement in March.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts reported no change 
in the already high levels of construction activity and the 
modest growth in leasing activity. Contractors report 
sufficient work to carry through to year-end, but a few 
new projects must break ground to maintain current 
activity levels through 2019. Although demand varies by 
sector and geography, rents tend to be rising in many 
markets, especially for industrial/warehouse sectors 
everywhere and for most sectors within the city of Phila-
delphia. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District expanded at a moderate pace as customer demand strengthened broadly and 
confidence remained high. Firms’ demand for labor increased, but difficulty finding qualified candidates is limiting the 
pace of hiring. In response, employers are raising wages to compete for workers, albeit only moderately. Rising com-
modity prices, particularly for steel, are pressuring goods producers. Meanwhile, services firms mostly noted stable input 
prices. Goods producers and transportation companies were generally successful at raising their selling prices. Service 
producers, however, tended to hold the line on their prices. Retailers reported continued growth in customer demand, 
although auto dealers reported higher inventories of passenger cars. Housing and commercial real estate markets 
remained strong, but builders are increasingly concerned about rising input costs. Manufacturing output trended higher.  
Employment and Wages  
District employers continued to hire at the same moder-
ate pace as in the past few months. Contacts generally 
reported stronger demand for their goods and services, 
but worker turnover and difficulty finding qualified work-
ers restrained net job gains. Notably, manufacturing 
employment has been steadily trending higher since mid
-2017. Nonfinancial services firms cited strong confi-
dence in the economy and rising freight volumes as 
boosting business and demand for workers. Retail 
showed the weakest gains in hiring. Replacing departed 
workers was the most prevalent labor-related activity, 
though several contacts in nearly all industries reported 
creating new positions. Nonresidential builders over-
whelmingly reported creating new field and office jobs. 
Contacts continued to report difficulty finding qualified 
candidates across a broad array of occupations. Never-
theless, no meaningful changes to wage pressures were 
noted. In general, employers are raising wages to stay 
competitive, but incremental increases are in keeping 
with recent trends.   
Prices  
Upward pressure on input prices remained strong, partic-
ularly for commodities used by goods producers. Accord-
ing to contacts, recently imposed tariffs have accelerated 
price appreciation of steel products, in some cases at 
double-digit rates. Independent of policy, prices for other 
commodities have also increased. One producer of 
industrial packaging noted that resin prices were still 
elevated because of lingering impact from hurricanes in 
2017. Professional services mostly reported little change 
to their nonlabor input costs. Firms’ ability to pass 
through price increases to their customers was little 
changed from the previous survey period, though there 
was considerable variation across industries. Transpor-
tation companies across the board were able to raise 
freight rates in response to strong demand relative to 
available capacity without pushback from customers. To 
a lesser extent, manufacturers have been steadily rais-
ing their prices since the beginning of the year to pass 
along their higher raw materials and transportation costs. 
Construction firms are also finding success in passing 
along their higher costs. In services, however, firms’ 
ability to pass through prices remains relatively soft. 
Retailers held their prices steady. 
Consumer Spending 
The retail sector reported improved customer demand 
since the beginning of the year and on a year-over-year 
basis. Reasons cited included improvements in product 
quality, marketing, customer service, and business strat-
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
egies. Vendor and shelf prices were generally stable. 
New motor vehicle unit sales across the District declined 
about 2 percent during February when compared to 
those of the same period a year ago. Year-to-date unit 
sales fell 5 percent. One auto dealer reported that banks 
are tightening credit, which could negatively impact 
future sales activity. Dealer inventory was higher than 
usual, which one contact attributed to lower incentives 
and less demand for passenger cars.   
Manufacturing 
Demand strengthened during the past two months in 
most industries. Some contacts attributed this to season-
al fluctuations and a recovery from slow growth in previ-
ous months. Contacts in primary metals and electrical 
and industrial products manufacturing noted that pro-
business fiscal policy and corporate tax reform spurred 
capital expenditures and drove up demand. One steel 
manufacturer mentioned that customers are attempting 
to stock up as prices rise because of increased demand 
and tariffs on primary metals imports. Elsewhere, an 
electronics manufacturer noted that high consumer 
confidence encouraged demand for discretionary items, 
a situation which is good for manufacturers of higher-end 
products. The majority of contacts indicated that demand 
was better than it was a year ago. A supplier to the 
HVAC industry mentioned that they saw increased de-
mand for finished products previously produced by 
downstream OEMs because those companies were 
struggling with capacity constraints and labor shortages. 
Real Estate and Construction 
New-home builders reported that customer demand was 
either steady or improving and that current trends are 
expected to continue into the spring selling season. That 
said, builders are becoming concerned that rising con-
struction costs (materials and labor) are driving up new 
home prices and that this may dampen buyer enthusi-
asm during the prime selling season. Construction costs 
are expected to increase through the summer. Year-to-
date unit sales through February of new and existing 
single-family homes declined 2 percent compared to 
those of a year earlier. The average sales price rose 
more than 7 percent. Buying patterns and inventory 
levels remained steady. 
Among nonresidential construction firms, demand gener-
ally improved during the survey period and on a year-
over-year basis thanks to more opportunities for projects 
emerging, especially as the weather improves. Increases 
in backlogs, inquiries, and bidding were observed. Cur-
rent levels of activity are expected to continue into the 
summer months. Almost all nonresidential contractors 
reported that rising construction costs (materials, labor, 
and transportation) are among the biggest challenges 
they are facing currently.   
Financial Services 
Growth in demand for bank products and services was 
little changed, though contacts noted that conditions 
remain favorable. Demand for commercial loans was 
healthy, but some contacts worried that businesses 
increasingly are relying on cash savings to fund capital 
investments before looking for bank credit. Most contacts 
seemed optimistic about the outlook for business invest-
ment in the coming quarter. On the consumer side, 
demand for loans was flat or declining. Some contacts, 
particularly in rural areas, reported that lack of inventory 
and depreciation of the housing stock dampened growth 
in home mortgages. Also, a lack of construction labor 
was constraining new home construction, thereby con-
straining opportunities for mortgages. More broadly, 
demand for consumer loans was flat, mostly because of 
seasonal factors. Reports indicated that competition from 
fintech firms and the nonbank sector continued to stifle 
growth in consumer loans and, to a lesser extent, in 
deposits.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector continued to 
grow at a moderate-to-strong pace. Rising freight vol-
umes across product segments were attributed primarily 
to solid economic growth. There is concern about the 
sustainability of increasing volume because of newly 
enacted tariffs and potential outcomes from NAFTA 
negotiations. Railroad contacts attributed some of their 
volume growth to ongoing capacity constraints in the 
trucking industry. Within the professional services sector, 
contacts from engineering, software development, and 
accounting firms reported the strongest growth, which 
they said was due to strong confidence in the overall 
economy. One accounting firm noted that its work in 
mergers and acquisitions was the strongest that it has 
been in the past 10 years. ■ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Since our previous report, the Fifth District economy grew moderately. Manufacturers provided mixed accounts of busi-
ness conditions with some noting continued challenges of rising input prices and shipping delays. Port activity remained 
strong, overall, with particularly high export growth coming out of South Carolina. Trucking firms continued to see robust 
demand and several companies were able to hire new drivers and increase capacity. Retailers reported weaker demand 
in recent weeks and tourist activity varied as atypical weather resulted in travel disruptions and lower hotel occupancies 
in some areas. Residential real estate sales picked up modestly, particularly for lower-priced homes. Meanwhile, com-
mercial real estate leasing activity rose moderately, led by increased demand for office space. Nonfinancial services saw 
a moderate rise in demand, overall. Labor demand strengthened moderately in recent weeks while wage pressures 
remained modest. Prices grew moderately, on balance; however, steel and aluminum prices rose sharply and were ex-
pected to rise further as a result of recently-imposed tariffs. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand continued to strengthen moderately in 
recent weeks. Compared to the previous report, employ-
ment agencies noted no change in the level of new job 
openings; however, openings remained at strong levels. 
Executives reported difficulty filling positions for ac-
counting and finance professionals, IT professionals, 
engineers, health care providers, and construction work-
ers. Wage pressures reportedly rose for residential 
builders, professional services workers, manufacturers, 
and IT professionals. Wage increases remained mod-
est, overall.  
Prices  
Prices grew moderately, on balance, since our previous 
report. According to our most recent surveys, manufac-
turers’ input costs grew at a moderate rate and contin-
ued to outpace growth in selling prices. Steel and alumi-
num prices rose sharply and were expected to rise 
further as a result of recently-imposed tariffs. Housing 
and construction material prices, such as those for 
appliances, cabinetry, carpet, drywall, lumber, and 
concrete were also on the rise. Service sector prices 
grew at a modest rate, overall. Contacts reported that 
coal and natural gas prices declined slightly in recent 
weeks. Meanwhile, oil and petroleum-based product 
prices grew moderately.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing business conditions were mixed in recent 
weeks. A Virginia food manufacturer reported an im-
provement in business activity with particularly strong 
Easter sales. A North Carolina machine parts company 
saw a rise in orders in March after a slow start to the 
year. Meanwhile, a Virginia window and door manufac-
turer reported softer demand due to adverse weather 
conditions. Manufacturers generally struggled with rising 
input prices and slow delivery times. In fact, a West 
Virginia rubber manufacturer said he started to store 
more raw materials on site since delivery times have 
more than doubled, on average. Similarly, a Virginia 
display case manufacturer reported stockpiling steel in 
anticipation of higher prices resulting from the new tariffs.  
Ports and Transportation 
Ports saw fairly strong activity in the past several weeks, 
with volumes of loaded containers rising, particularly for 
exports. A South Carolina airport saw growth in both 
passenger and cargo traffic, and continued to see a 
balance of imports and exports after a long period of 
exports lagging. A South Carolina port saw a slight sof-
tening of imports compared to last year but experienced 
a drastic increase in exports. A Maryland port saw strong 
growth in imports and exports compared to last year with 
import growth slightly outpacing export growth. Several 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

E-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  
ports noted some uncertainty about what effects the 
steel tariffs might have on trade. 
Trucking companies continued see robust growth, with 
many facing more freight than they could handle. How-
ever, several companies had more success hiring drivers 
in the past few weeks, which helped to increase their 
capacity. Even with this capacity boost, firms had to turn 
away business because they were unable to meet de-
mand. Several trucking firms were also concerned about 
rising equipment and repair costs potentially leading to a 
shortage of trucks that could add to capacity constraints. 
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Many retailers reported weak demand in recent weeks. A 
Virginia auto dealer attributed low sales to reduced cus-
tomer traffic and low credit scores among potential buy-
ers and said that the lower sales combined with increas-
ing prices from manufacturers had hurt profits. A West 
Virginia sporting goods retailer reported that retail sales 
continued to fall as some consumers were increasingly 
buying directly from manufacturers; however, the whole-
sale sales continued to keep the business afloat. On a 
positive note, several furniture and clothing retailers saw 
a slight uptick in sales, and a West Virginia appliance 
retailer reported strong business activity.  
Tourist activity was mixed in recent weeks, due in part to 
adverse weather conditions. A Virginia ski resort was 
unable to make up losses after temporarily closing for 
unusually warm weather. At the same time, the 
nor’easter storms caused flight cancellations and shut-
downs in Washington, D.C., leaving hotels in the area 
with low occupancy rates. Hotels in Charleston, South 
Carolina also had low occupancy rates, but attributed 
them to increased supply as demand for rooms actually 
rose in the area. Meanwhile, some North Carolina res-
taurants and hotels reported strong demand despite 
difficult travel conditions created by winter storms. Hotels 
and tourist attractions around the District were optimistic 
that business would improve along with the weather in 
the coming weeks. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased modestly com-
pared to the previous report. Agents reported steady 
buyer traffic in recent weeks, while homes in the 
$200,000 – $400,000 price range sold quickly with multi-
ple offers. Overall, inventory levels remained low and in 
some regions were below last year’s levels. Home prices 
rose modestly, while average days on the market were 
generally unchanged. New home construction and sales 
increased slightly across the District.  
Commercial real estate leasing activity rose moderately 
in recent weeks as brokers reported increased demand 
in office leasing, while the industrial and retail markets 
remained active. Vacancy rates were mostly unchanged, 
although some agents reported modest increases in 
office vacancy rates due to new supply coming on line. 
Rental rates were stable to increasing modestly across 
the District. On the commercial sales side, brokers re-
ported modest increases in prices and sales. Commer-
cial construction varied across the District, but most 
contacts noted that new construction remained limited.  
Banking and Finance 
On the whole, loan demand increased modestly since 
our previous report. Residential mortgage demand var-
ied by location but was generally described as stable to 
increasing modestly. Interest rates inched higher in 
recent weeks, while deposits were up modestly, overall. 
On the commercial side, loan demand varied, with a 
notable uptick reported in the greater Raleigh and Ashe-
ville, North Carolina areas. Credit quality remained 
strong while credit standards were generally unchanged. 
Bankers continued to report strong competition among 
banks, credit unions, and financial technology firms.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, nonfinancial services demand picked up 
moderately since our previous report. The strongest 
demand was reported for administrative services and 
health care services. Comments from professional and 
business services firms were mostly positive; however, 
some firms noted a decline in activity due to reductions 
in federal spending. Lastly, a natural gas utility firm re-
ported softer demand as usage declined due to warmer 
weather.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
A farmer in South Carolina saw more acreage being 
used to grow cotton as a result of higher export selling 
prices. He also said that more agricultural land was 
being converted to solar farms. Coal production was little 
changed in recent weeks while natural gas production 
declined slightly. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic conditions continued to improve modestly from the previous 
report. The majority of contacts were relatively optimistic with expectations for continued modest growth over the next 
three to six months. The labor market remained tight and overall wage growth was modest. Most firms noted that most 
nonlabor input cost pressures were muted, though some noted increases related to the threat of tariffs. Retail sales 
remained stable since the previous report while automotive dealers remarked that demand for vehicles had weakened. 
Hospitality contacts noted solid domestic activity. Residential real estate builders and brokers indicated that home sales 
were flat to slightly down. New home construction increased slightly since the previous report. On balance, commercial 
real estate conditions continued to improve. Manufacturers cited increases in new orders and production.   
Employment and Wages  
District contacts continued to report difficulties filling 
positions in high-demand/high-growth sectors, particular-
ly in the information technology, long-haul transportation, 
construction, and medical fields. Several contacts from 
the transportation sector reported elevated driver turn-
over. In response to labor shortages, firms continued to 
enhance training efforts for less-experienced candidates, 
expand partnerships with workforce development entities 
and community colleges, and broaden their geographical 
search for candidates. 
Overall, reports of wage growth were mixed across the 
District. Many contacts noted steady but modest wage 
growth; however, geographies and sectors experiencing 
high growth continued to report large wage increases in 
order to attract and retain workers. In particular, contacts 
from the transportation sector reported that they were 
compelled to provide drivers with sizeable bonuses and 
wage increases in an attempt to thwart turnover. Em-
ployers continued to share that they were increasing the 
proportion of employee compensation that is not perma-
nent and can be withdrawn, if needed (e.g., bonuses, 
incentives, etc.).     
Prices  
Overall, businesses continued to report relatively benign 
input-cost pressures. However, some contacts noted 
rising prices for transportation, as well as steel as tariff 
rhetoric increased. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation 
Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit costs 
were up 1.9 percent in March. Looking ahead, survey 
respondents indicated that they expect unit costs to rise 
2.1 percent over the next twelve months.        
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retailers continued to report steady sales levels 
during this reporting period, on net. Home improvement 
retailers noted an increase in sales levels during the first 
two months of the year; automotive dealers reported a 
decline in demand for February compared to the same 
time last year. 
Travel and tourism contacts reported strong domestic 
travel while group and convention travel softened since 
the last report. Demand for hotel rooms accelerated 
even though occupancy rates declined due to an in-
crease in the number of rooms coming on line and a pick
-up in online lodging services. Sentiment from travel and 
tourism contacts remains optimistic heading into spring.     
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from District residential real estate contacts 
signaled continued modest growth. Builders reported flat 
to slightly higher construction activity in February com-
pared to one year earlier. Builders and brokers indicated 
that home sales activity was flat to slightly down from the 
year-ago level. Many brokers reported mixed buyer 
traffic, while builders characterized traffic as unchanged 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
from the previous report. Builders reported that inventory 
levels remained flat whereas brokers indicated lower 
levels compared to one year ago. Builders and brokers 
continued to note that home prices increased in Febru-
ary. Looking ahead, residential real estate contacts 
expect home sales activity to hold steady or increase 
slightly over the next three months relative to the year-
ago level, with many builders expecting construction 
activity to remain unchanged or increase slightly. 
District commercial real estate contacts cited continued 
improvement in general economic conditions and the 
availability of capital as factors supporting favorable 
commercial real estate demand and pricing. However, 
contacts continued to caution that the rate of improve-
ment varied by metropolitan area, submarket, and prop-
erty type. Contacts continued to report healthy activity 
pipelines. The outlook among commercial contacts for 
nonresidential and multifamily construction remained 
positive, with the majority anticipating activity to match or 
exceed the current level.      
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts indicated that overall business 
activity remained strong since the last reporting period. 
New orders and production levels rose, and most firms 
indicated they were adding to their payrolls. Contacts 
suggested that prices for their finished products were 
holding steady, while some input costs continued to 
increase. Most firms indicated that they are optimistic 
about the near term.       
Transportation 
Transportation contacts continued to note varying levels 
of activity over the reporting period. Railroads again cited 
decreases in year-to-date total traffic, albeit at a slower 
rate of decline than described in the previous report. 
Trucking contacts reported increases in freight volume, 
but driver shortages continued to constrain capacity. 
District ports indicated further strength in shipments of 
containers and breakbulk cargo, and air cargo contacts 
noted year-over-year increases in freight tonnage.        
Banking and Finance  
District bankers continued to report solid commercial and 
consumer loan growth. Contacts noted that lending rates 
have coalesced around a narrow range but pricing for 
consumer lending is increasing. Banking contacts also 
noted that commercial acquisitions slowed due to difficul-
ties over pricing of the targets.         
Energy  
Sentiment among energy contacts was mostly positive 
as demand picked up. Global demand for liquefied natu-
ral gas (LNG) continued to intensify, resulting in rising 
exports of LNG out of Louisiana’s Sabine Pass liquefac-
tion terminal. In petrochemical markets, contacts shared 
that supplies remained tight and backlogs continued to 
build after freezing conditions across the Gulf Coast 
temporarily reduced or ceased operations at several 
plants, and in some cases, caused power outages and 
infrastructure damage. Elevated Mississippi River water 
levels prevented many petrochemical plants from receiv-
ing input products needed to produce chemicals for 
domestic and global use, which also contributed to grow-
ing backlogs and imports.      
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Drought conditions improved in much of the District 
although light frosts in March affected some crops. Agri-
cultural exporters indicated that the weaker dollar was 
having a favorable impact. On a year-over-year basis, 
prices paid to farmers in February were up for rice, beef, 
broilers, and eggs and down for corn, cotton, and soy-
beans. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District continued at a moderate pace in late February and March and con-
tacts expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment, consumer spending, and 
manufacturing production increased moderately, and business spending and construction and real estate activity grew 
slightly. Wages and prices increased modestly and financial conditions improved slightly on balance. Income prospects 
for the agricultural sector improved a bit, in spite of concerns about the impact of Chinese tariffs. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a moderate pace over 
the reporting period and contacts expected gains to 
continue at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Hiring 
was focused on professional and technical, production, 
and sales workers. As they have for some time, contacts 
indicated that the labor market was tight and reported 
difficulties filling positions at all skill levels. A number of 
manufacturers reported that because of the difficulty in 
finding production workers, they were being more picky 
about which orders to fill and investing more in automa-
tion. One contact reported increasing production at their 
China plant because they couldn’t find workers for their 
US operation. Wage growth remained modest overall, 
though more contacts reported pay increases for admin-
istrative workers. In spite of the modest overall growth, a 
number of contacts (particularly in manufacturing) noted 
that wage growth had picked up compared to six months 
ago, especially for entry-level workers. Most firms report-
ed increased benefits costs. 
Prices 
Overall, prices rose modestly in late February and 
March, and contacts expected prices to continue to 
increase at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail 
prices again increased slightly overall, though grocery 
prices were flat. Producer prices rose modestly, reflect-
ing in part the pass-through of higher labor, materials, 
and freight costs. Manufacturers facing higher steel and 
aluminum costs because of the new tariffs expected to 
pass on about half of the increased costs to their cus-
tomers on average. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased moderately over the 
reporting period. Nonauto retail sales rose modestly, with 
gains reported in the home furnishings, building materi-
als, home improvement, and general merchandise seg-
ments. Contacts continued to report strong e-commerce 
growth. New light vehicle sales increased considerably, 
helped by stronger incentives, particularly for leases. 
One contact called the incentives for some vehicles “a 
little irrational.” Contacts generally expected the sales 
pace to slow in the coming months. Used vehicle sales 
also increased considerably. The sales mix of new light 
vehicles again shifted toward light trucks. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in late February 
and March. Retail and manufacturing contacts indicated 
that inventories were generally at comfortable levels. 
Capital spending increased modestly, and contacts 
expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 
to 12 months. Outlays were primarily for replacing indus-
trial and IT equipment and for renovating structures. A 
number of manufacturing contacts reported that lead 
times for purchasing new equipment were notably longer 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

G-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
than six months ago. Demand for commercial and indus-
trial energy increased modestly and transportation de-
mand increased moderately. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased modestly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction rose 
modestly, led by expanded suburban single-family build-
ing. Contacts again reported that rising labor and materi-
als costs were squeezing margins. Overall, home sales 
were down slightly as low inventories of starter homes 
continued to hold back sales. Home prices rose modest-
ly overall, with notable increases in the starter home 
segment and no change in prices for higher-end homes. 
Nonresidential construction increased modestly, with 
growth spread across sectors. That said, contacts ex-
pected growth to pick up over the next 6 to 12 months 
because vacancy rates for office and industrial space are 
low. Commercial real estate activity increased slightly 
from an already strong level, and contacts expected 
activity to increase slightly further over the next 6 to 12 
months. Numerous contacts characterized the commer-
cial real estate environment as “very good” or 
“exuberant.” Commercial rents were flat overall. And 
while there was a slight decline in vacancy rates, the 
availability of sublease space increased a bit. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production continued at a solid 
rate in late February and March. Steel production in-
creased at a moderate pace, primarily in response to 
steady end-user demand. Steel imports spiked in antici-
pation of the 25% tariff imposed in late March. Demand 
for heavy machinery increased strongly, as end-user 
demand expanded and dealers rebuilt inventories. De-
mand for heavy trucks remained at a strong level. Order 
books for specialty metals manufacturers increased 
modestly: growth was spread across a wide variety of 
sectors, with particularly strong growth from the oil and 
gas sector. Manufacturers of construction materials 
continued to report slow but steady increases in ship-
ments, in line with the pace of improvement in construc-
tion. Auto production was flat, but remained at a solid 
level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved slightly over the reporting 
period. Financial market participants noted higher volatil-
ity compared to the beginning of the year and rising  
short-term interest rates. Business loan demand in-
creased modestly, led by growth in the small business 
segment. One contact noted that manufacturers through-
out the District were increasing their credit line utilization. 
While competition remained strong, contacts reported 
little change in lending standards or loan quality. Con-
sumer loan demand also increased modestly, with con-
tacts reporting rising demand for auto loans, lines of 
credit, and loans secured by durable goods. Residential 
mortgage activity picked up, and a contact in northern 
Indiana reported a notable increase in the number of 
mortgages for new home construction. Consumer loan 
quality and lending standards were little changed. 
Agriculture 
Income prospects for the agricultural sector improved a 
bit during the reporting period, in spite of concerns about 
the impact of Chinese tariffs. Corn and soybean prices 
moved higher (helped by weather concerns in Argentina) 
and allowed farmers to lock in modest profits for at least 
a portion of their crops this year. Moisture profiles for 
most of the District improved, though drought persisted 
in a portion of Iowa. Prospects for livestock operations 
dimmed some as cattle and hog prices declined and milk 
prices stayed low. Egg prices and prices for some dairy 
products did move up. Agricultural lenders continued to 
report a slowly rising number of financially stressed crop 
and livestock borrowers. Cash rents for cropland were 
lower than a year ago, but land values were stable over-
all. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts suggest economic conditions have continued to improve at a modest pace since our previous 
report. Labor market conditions remain tight: Employment grew slightly and wage growth was modest. Overall inflation 
strengthened slightly, held down by a slight decline in commodity prices. Reports on consumer spending were generally 
positive. Residential real estate activity improved modestly while construction activity was little changed. District banks 
reported increased lending activity driven by robust growth in commercial and industrial loans. Agriculture and natural 
resources conditions have remained generally unchanged since the previous report.  
Employment and Wages  
Anecdotal evidence suggests employment has grown 
slightly since the previous report. There were reports of 
modest increases in manufacturing employment in Ar-
kansas and Missouri as well as a modest increase in 
small business employment in Missouri. Contacts contin-
ued to report difficulties finding qualified employees. For 
example, a construction contact in Little Rock reported 
difficulties filling skilled positions, and a used-auto retail-
er reported trouble hiring mechanics and technicians. 
Several organizations in Little Rock have undertaken 
initiatives to create training opportunities to address the 
skills gap. 
Wages have increased modestly since the previous 
report. Reports from contacts in Little Rock indicate that 
wages have risen for workers such as truck drivers, 
warehouse workers, and skilled mechanics. One used-
auto retailer noted plans to use some of their tax savings 
to increase compensation for some employees.   
Prices  
Price pressures have increased slightly since the previ-
ous report. Building materials prices rose. A contact in 
northwest Arkansas reported an increase in construction 
costs, and steel and scrap metal prices increased mod-
erately throughout the District. Flooding throughout the 
Midwest led to a significant increase in barge freight 
rates along the Mississippi River. 
After modest to moderate increases through the first two 
months of the year, commodity prices have declined 
slightly since the previous report. Wheat, sorghum, corn, 
and soybean prices decreased moderately, and coal, 
cotton, and rice prices were unchanged.  
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate that consumer spending has modestly in-
creased since our previous report. Real sales tax collec-
tions decreased in Missouri relative to a year ago but 
increased in Arkansas, Tennessee, and Kentucky. Con-
sumer confidence surveys continued to show improve-
ments in West Tennessee, although households expect 
no change in their level of spending over the next few 
months. Reports from Little Rock auto dealers were 
mixed. Hospitality contacts in St. Louis reported that 
sales increased year-over-year and that their outlook 
remains positive over the next few months.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report. Overall manufacturing activity was 
stronger than one month earlier in both Arkansas and 
Missouri, and the pace of expansion increased in both 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
states. Several companies in the District reported facility 
expansion and hiring plans, including firms that produce 
auto parts and aviation equipment. In addition, steel and 
aluminum manufacturers announced plans to reopen 
facilities and call back workers. Contacts at economic 
development agencies in central Arkansas reported 
growing interest from manufacturing firms looking for 
locations to build new facilities.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector has been mostly unchanged 
since the previous report. The number of vacancies 
posted by firms for non-financial services occupations in 
March remained flat since the prior month, with the ex-
ception of St. Louis area vacancies, which moderately 
declined. In Arkansas, river barge traffic was much lower 
in the beginning of 2018 compared with a year ago, 
while air passenger volume remained unchanged.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has improved modestly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales increased modestly in February across the Dis-
trict’s four major MSAs. Local contacts reported that 
demand remains strong but shortages in inventory con-
tinue to hinder sales.  
Residential construction activity remained unchanged. 
February permit activity was flat within District MSAs. 
Local contacts continued to report that a shortage of 
labor is limiting new construction. 
Commercial construction activity was flat. February 
nonresidential construction starts remained unchanged 
relative to the previous month, although multifamily 
permits declined moderately. Little Rock construction 
contacts reported healthy levels of commercial construc-
tion activity across most sectors and expect this trend to 
continue through the second quarter of 2018.   
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District strengthened at a 
moderate pace relative to the previous reporting period. 
According to reports from District bankers, overall loan 
volume has accelerated since our previous report, in-
creasing by 9 percent on a year-over-year basis in the 
first quarter of 2018, up from 7 percent growth for the 
previous quarter. Stronger loan growth was driven by 
robust activity in commercial and industrial lending, 
where loan volumes grew by 17 percent relative to year-
ago levels. In addition, outstanding loans for commercial 
real estate increased by 11 percent, more than double 
the national rate. Meanwhile, mortgage lending slowed 
slightly as loan volumes rose by 3 percent, down from 4 
percent the prior quarter.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions were unchanged from the 
previous reporting period and the same as a year earlier. 
District corn acreage for 2018 is expected to decrease 2 
percent from last year. Planned soybean acreage is 
about the same as 2017 acreage. Cotton and rice acre-
ages are expected to increase 2 percent and 16 percent, 
respectively, due to expectations of improved profitabil-
ity. Overall, District acreage for the four major crops is 
expected to be roughly the same as in 2017.  
Natural resource extraction conditions improved modest-
ly from January to February, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production increasing 9 percent. However, February 
production was down 6 percent from the same month 
last year.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District saw moderate economic growth since the last report. Employment increased modestly, constrained by 
a tight labor supply. Wage and price pressures were moderate. Growth was noted in consumer spending, tourism, 
services, commercial construction, commercial real estate, manufacturing, energy, and mining. Home construction was 
generally flat, while commercial real estate was mixed and residential real estate was slow. Agricultural conditions were 
stable at low levels.  
Employment and Wages 
Despite healthy labor demand, employment grew 
modestly since the last report, muted by tight labor 
supply. A survey of large Minnesota businesses found 
that about half were hiring to increase total head counts. 
Three other surveys also showed healthy hiring 
sentiment in District states. Several job-tracking 
databases showed generally strong labor demand. 
February job ads in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula and 
North Dakota were higher compared with a year earlier. 
In Minnesota, figures released at the end of March 
showed job vacancies at an all-time high, increasing 16 
percent over a year earlier. However, in South Dakota, 
both new and total advertised jobs declined in February 
relative to a year earlier. Tight labor markets were 
evident across the District. Initial and total 
unemployment insurance claims continued a downward 
trend through mid-March compared with last year. A 
western Montana staffing contact said labor orders were 
“up in all of our markets. Our biggest struggle is lack of 
candidates.” A Minneapolis-St. Paul workforce contact 
said more companies are turning to job fairs and local 
workforce centers for help, but “attendance has been 
down at hiring events,” and foot traffic at job centers has 
been slow. Participants in dislocated-worker programs 
“are getting jobs so much faster than in the past. Many 
are exiting the program in two or three months.”  
 
Wage pressures were moderate since the last report. A 
survey of Minnesota businesses found that wage 
increases coalesced a little below 3 percent. There were 
signs of stronger increases for some workers. Union 
construction workers in Minnesota were seeing wage 
increases of 3 percent to 4 percent. Montana high tech 
firms expected wages to increase by 5 percent in 2018. 
Wage increases in the public sector were weaker. In 
South Dakota, state workers received an increase of 1.2 
percent, while 30,000 state workers in Minnesota 
received a 2 percent increase this year, though roughly 
half were also eligible for other increases.   
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate overall since the last 
report, but wholesale prices increased more briskly. 
Multiple contacts reported dramatic increases in the 
prices for steel products, partly attributable to recently 
announced tariffs; a manufacturer of tractor trailers said 
they “can't raise prices as fast as material costs.” Retail 
fuel prices in most District states as of late March were 
slightly higher than in the previous reporting period, while 
prices for heating oil and propane in late March—their 
usual seasonal peak—saw double-digit percentage 
increases relative to a year earlier. Prices for 
construction materials continued to increase briskly. 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending grew moderately since the last 
report. Gross sales in South Dakota saw a notable 
increase in the first two months of the year, and 
Wisconsin also saw a rise in gross sales. Retail closures 
continued, including nine stores across the District from 
a single chain. But they appeared to be due to shifts in 
consumer buying habits rather than soft overall demand, 
as retail vacancy rates remained healthy overall. A 
convenience store chain announced plans to open 11 
new locations in Minnesota this year, though that 
expansion was smaller than in years past. Gaming 
revenues in Deadwood, S.D., to date have been flat 
compared with the same period a year earlier, but hotel 
occupancy rates improved. After a boom related to the 
Super Bowl, hotel occupancy rates and average room 
revenue in Minneapolis-St. Paul returned to more normal 
levels, which were softening due to a major expansion of 
new space. Passenger boardings at Minneapolis-St. 
Paul International Airport for the first two months of 2018 
were 2 percent higher than the same period in 2017, and 
cargo volumes rose more than 6 percent.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
briskly since the last report. An electronic components 
distributor was preparing for a $300 million expansion. 
Demand for information technology services was strong, 
according to sources. A civil engineering contact in 
Montana reported that demand for work was up briskly. 
A distributor of office products described recent sales as 
strong. Contacts in transportation generally described 
freight demand as steady, though some trucking firms 
were reporting substantial increases in business .  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction saw moderate growth since the 
last report. An industry database showed continued 
growth in new projects and total active projects through 
mid-March compared with the same period a year 
earlier. Most industry contacts were also upbeat. A 
Minnesota contact said firms were reporting a “pretty 
strong” pipeline for 2018, fueled by robust activity in K-12 
school and multifamily housing construction. An Upper 
Peninsula source said overall activity there was “very 
strong,” with a number of large energy, healthcare, and 
infrastructure projects. At the same time, construction 
has slowed recently from very high levels in Sioux Falls, 
S.D. Residential construction in the single-family market 
was generally flat across the District. Numerous sources 
noted that high and rising labor and materials costs were 
a major constraint. However, multi-family construction 
was strong in multiple District markets. 
Commercial real estate sales grew modestly since the 
last report. Vacancy rates continued to remain low and 
stable in many real estate sectors across the District. 
However, the multifamily vacancy rate in Sioux Falls 
rose to its highest level in several years after a persistent 
expansion of supply. The city has also seen a number of 
restaurant and big-box store closures, pushing retail 
vacancies higher. Given the influx of new multifamily 
units, sources expected vacancy rates in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul to start rising. Residential real estate sales were 
slow, especially relative to demand, due to low 
inventories of homes for sale. Though most regions in 
the District have seen year-over-year sales remain flat or 
fall over the first two months of the year, tight inventories 
have persistently pushed median prices higher across 
the District.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing increased moderately since the 
last report. An index of manufacturing conditions 
indicated increased activity in March compared with a 
month earlier in Minnesota and South Dakota; North 
Dakota fell to a level indicating contraction. Several 
contacts in the metal-fabricating industry reported strong 
demand. A producer of precast concrete products said 
demand had increased capital investment at their firm 
and across the industry. A maker of shipping and 
storage pallets also said demand increased notably. 
Several firms around the District were expanding 
facilities, including a construction equipment producer in 
North Dakota and a custom manufacturer in Minnesota. 
In contrast, an electrical equipment producer closed a 
plant in Wisconsin.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were stable at low levels. 
Though drought conditions abated slightly since the last 
report, most of the Dakotas and portions of Montana 
remained dry heading into the spring planting season. 
Activity in the energy and mining sectors increased. Oil 
and gas exploration activity was up; the drilling rig count 
in the District as of late March increased about 10 
percent from the last reporting period. A large solar 
energy development was proposed in South Dakota and 
a wind farm in North Dakota was expanding. Contacts at 
nonferrous mines in Montana said the market for metals 
was strong, with one noting that they could not produce 
enough molybdenum to meet demand. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Overall economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in March, although more modest growth was reported across a 
few District sectors. Consumer spending, energy, and manufacturing activity increased at a moderate pace, while Dis-
trict real estate and business services firms reported a modest pace of growth. Bankers reported a moderate increase in 
overall loan demand, steady deposit levels, and a modest increase in loan quality. Agricultural conditions remained 
weak, as drought conditions emerged and production expectations declined. Employment and employee hours in-
creased in most sectors, and contacts reported modest wage growth with moderate increases expected in coming 
months. Input prices were up moderately compared to the previous survey period, while selling prices rose modestly.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment and employee hours across the District 
continued to rise modestly in March, and respondents 
expected continued modest increases moving forward. 
Contacts in all sectors reported steady-to-increasing 
employment, with the exception of those in the transpor-
tation sector who noted a moderate decline. Employment 
in all sectors was expected to grow in the months ahead. 
Employee hours declined in the auto sales and transpor-
tation sectors, but rose in all other reporting industries. 
Respondents noted a shortage of commercial drivers, 
skilled technicians, and service workers.    
Contacts in most sectors reported modest wage growth 
and expectations were for moderate wage growth mov-
ing forward. 
Prices  
Overall, input prices were up moderately compared to 
the previous survey period, while selling prices grew at 
modest pace. Respondents in the retail sector reported 
moderately higher input and selling prices, and anticipat-
ed continued moderate rises in both. Restaurant input 
prices were up moderately, while selling prices edged up 
slightly. Transportation contacts reported modest growth 
in both input and selling prices, but at a slower pace than 
in the prior survey. Prices in the construction sector 
continued to rise moderately, with strong increases 
expected in the coming months. Manufacturers noted a 
modest increase in prices for finished goods, while raw 
material costs rose moderately. Manufacturers expected 
moderate growth in both finished goods and raw material 
prices over the next few months.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending grew moderately in March, and 
firms expected strong growth in coming months. Retail 
sales increased robustly compared to the previous sur-
vey period, and remained well above year-ago levels. 
Several retailers noted an increase in sales for applianc-
es and lower priced items, while outdoor and higher-
priced products sold poorly. Retail contacts anticipated 
sales to rise considerably in the next few months, and 
inventory levels were expected to increase moderately. 
Auto sales rose modestly after many months of decline 
and were equal to year-ago levels. Dealer contacts 
anticipated a strong pickup in sales for the months 
ahead, and inventory levels were expected to increase 
considerably. Restaurant sales declined moderately and 
were well below year-ago levels. However, contacts 
expected a strong rebound in activity heading forward. 
District tourism activity fell slightly, but contacts expected 
activity to increase moderately heading into the summer 
months.  
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moder-
ate pace, and the majority of other business contacts 
reported modest sales increases. Durable goods manu-
facturers reported sustained growth in production, partic-
ularly for machinery and aircraft, while growth in nondu-
rable goods activity moderated slightly. Shipments and 
order backlog grew at a modest pace, and activity was 
higher than a year ago. Manufacturers’ capital spending 
plans rose moderately, and firms’ expectations for future 
activity remained strong.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
wholesale trade firms reported modest sales growth, 
while transportation contacts noted a moderate decrease 
in activity. All firms expected sales to improve moderate-
ly in the next six months. Professional and high tech 
contacts anticipated moderate growth in capital spending 
plans, while transportation and wholesale trade firms 
expected capital spending to be relatively flat in coming 
months. 
Real Estate and Construction  
Real estate activity in the District continued to increase 
at a modest pace, and additional gains were expected in 
the months ahead. Residential home sales rose modest-
ly, while home prices and inventories increased at a 
slight pace compared to the previous survey period. 
Sales of low- and medium-priced homes continued to 
outpace sales of higher-priced homes. Residential sales 
and home prices were expected to increase at a moder-
ate pace in the months ahead, although one contact in 
Colorado reported that the typical spring seasonal pick-
up in activity was slow to begin this year. Residential 
construction activity was mixed as construction supply 
contacts noted lower sales while builders reported mod-
erately higher housing starts and traffic of potential buy-
ers. Commercial real estate activity continued to rise at a 
modest pace, and expectations were for additional gains 
moving forward. 
Banking 
Bankers reported a moderate increase in overall loan 
demand for the month of March. Respondents reported a 
modest increase for commercial real estate loans and 
slightly improved demand for commercial and industrial 
and residential real estate loans. Consumer installment 
loans were down slightly, while agricultural loans were 
steady. Bankers indicated loan quality improved modest-
ly compared to a year ago. In addition, respondents 
expected a modest increase in loan quality over the next 
six months. Credit standards remained largely un-
changed in all major loan categories. Overall, bankers 
reported steady deposit levels.  
Energy 
Energy activity expanded moderately since the last 
survey period, and expectations remained cautiously 
optimistic. The number of active oil and gas rigs in-
creased slightly, while oil production continued to grow. 
Respondents said the price they needed to be profitable 
in the areas in which they were active inched up slightly, 
and they expected mostly stable oil prices over the next 
six months due to strong domestic production. The ma-
jority of contacts said potential steel and aluminum tariffs 
would have a low-to-medium impact on their drilling 
costs, and several have already experienced moderate 
increases in the cost of steel. The natural gas market 
continued to be oversupplied, straining available takea-
way capacity in Oklahoma. 
Agriculture 
In the Tenth District, farm income and credit conditions 
remained weak, and the short-term outlook for the agri-
cultural sector has been influenced by 2018 crop produc-
tion expectations and drought. Approximately half of 
winter wheat acres in Kansas and Oklahoma were rated 
as poor or very poor due to abnormally dry conditions. 
Corn production was expected to remain unchanged or 
decline slightly in all District states. After very strong 
growth in 2017, production of soybeans was expected to 
remain relatively unchanged in most states, while cotton 
production in Oklahoma was forecasted to continue to 
expand due to higher prices relative to other crops. 
Lower production expectations for corn, soybeans and 
wheat supported slightly higher prices. However, District 
contacts continued to express concerns about severe 
drought, cash flow shortages, decreasing liquidity among 
farm borrowers, high production expenses and trade 
uncertainty.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded at a moderate pace over the past six weeks. Growth in the nonfinancial ser-
vices sector accelerated, and retail sales rebounded. Loan demand growth picked up. Robust expansion in the energy 
industry continued, while growth in manufacturing eased somewhat. Home sales continued to rise. Hiring was solid 
across most sectors, and widespread labor shortages continued. Wage and price growth remained elevated, and sever-
al contacts noted a marked rise in the cost of steel. Outlooks, while still optimistic, have become more uncertain due to 
new tariffs and trade concerns. 
Employment and Wages  
Solid employment growth continued, and wage pres-
sures remained elevated. Hiring picked up pace in  
services, retail and energy. Among manufacturers,  
employment growth eased a bit. Labor shortages either 
continued or escalated, covering a wide array of indus-
tries and skill levels. Multiple contacts said employee 
retention had become increasingly difficult across skill-
sets, although they noted that low-skill workers in partic-
ular were quick to leave for better-paying positions. 
Contacts reported that some rural employers were  
busing in workers from nearby cities because their local 
labor pool was tapped out. Wage growth remained  
elevated across the board and increased further in the 
energy industry.  
Prices 
Price pressures remained elevated over the past six 
weeks. Input cost pressures increased among energy, 
manufacturing, and construction firms, partly due to the 
announced tariffs on steel and aluminum. Upstream 
energy firms said the steel tariffs represent a worry, 
although some contacts said there shouldn’t be much of 
an impact on costs until 2019 when contracts roll over. 
Downstream energy contacts were still figuring out how 
much of their steel is subject to the new tariff and how 
that will affect their costs and investment decisions. 
Several manufacturers said that talk of steel tariffs   
immediately resulted in higher steel prices. An architec-
ture firm noted that the increase in steel costs will impact 
the ability of their clients to move forward with some 
construction projects. Average gasoline and diesel prices 
were fairly stable, although transportation services con-
tacts noted that fuel costs were up notably from a year 
ago. 
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector continued, alt-
hough the overall pace of growth eased from the highs 
seen in recent months. Output growth was led by trans-
portation and high tech manufacturing, two sectors that 
saw an acceleration over the reporting period. Growth in 
chemical production receded from February’s elevated 
rates, and fabricated metals and food production contin-
ued to post slower growth relative to other types of man-
ufacturing. Expectations regarding future business condi-
tions remained optimistic, although several contacts 
noted that the newly enacted tariffs were creating a lot of 
uncertainty in their outlooks for activity and prices. Refin-
ers and petrochemical producers specifically mentioned 
their views about the potential negative impact of these 
tariffs on construction projects.  
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales rebounded over the past six weeks, led by a 
sharp rise in auto sales after a challenging start to the 
year. A clothing retailer noted that sales continued to 
stabilize in stores located in oil patch markets, while 
sales in stores along the border started to slip once 
again. Other contacts also mentioned softness in retail 
sales along the border, citing online retailing and the 
development of retail space in Mexico as drivers of the 
weakness. For retail more broadly, contacts noted a 
continued increase in internet sales, with growth acceler-
ating over the reporting period. Outlooks among retailers 
in general remained positive, but some contacts said 
their expectations were clouded by the potential negative 
impacts of trade and immigration policies. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Growth in the nonfinancial services sector picked up 
over the reporting period, with most industries noting an 
acceleration. Leisure and hospitality was a particular 
bright spot, with revenue growing again after weakness 
earlier this year. Transportation services firms said rail 
and air cargo volumes strengthened further while courier 
cargo and airline demand remained stable. Growth in 
health care lagged other industries, with contacts point-
ing to a challenging environment with increased regula-
tory requirements and decreased funding and/or reim-
bursements. Staffing services contacts noted high levels 
of demand, driven by activity being broad based across 
geographies and sectors. Outlooks rose slightly over the 
past six weeks, although uncertainty surrounding trade 
policies and the new tariffs negatively impacted some 
firms’ expectations. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose moderately since the last report, with 
particular strength noted at the lower price points. Out-
looks were positive, but there is concern among builders 
about margin compression and the impact of rising mort-
gage rates on future sales. Apartment demand was 
seasonally slow during the first quarter, and occupancy 
rates fell in all major Texas metro areas as an aggres-
sive pace of new deliveries exceeded demand. Rent 
growth accelerated in Houston, but was sluggish in 
Dallas and San Antonio and dipped in Austin. Multifamily 
construction remained active, although it has moderated 
somewhat relative to last year. 
Office market conditions remained weak in Houston, and 
contacts reported an uptick in sublease space. The 
industrial market was characterized as solid, and the 
vacancy rate generally remained low across major met-
ros. Reports on retail leasing activity were mixed. 
Financial Services 
Overall loan volumes and demand increased at a faster 
pace over the past six weeks. Markedly stronger growth 
in loan volumes was seen in commercial and industrial, 
and commercial real estate. Residential real estate loan 
volumes continued to grow at roughly the same pace as 
during the prior reporting period, while consumer loan 
volumes declined. Credit standards and terms continued 
to tighten, and loan pricing increased at a similar pace as 
the prior report. Banking contacts remained optimistic, 
expecting total loan demand to be better six months from 
now. Some contacts mentioned optimism in the market 
due to tax reform, while others noted uncertainty about 
how new tariffs will impact Texas businesses.  
Energy 
Energy activity continued to expand moderately. The rig 
count increased over the reporting period and drilling 
and completion activity was up in the Permian Basin and 
Eagle Ford. Outlooks remained positive for 2018, sup-
ported by oil prices holding at levels at which the vast 
majority of firms can profitably increase drilling. However, 
multiple contacts suggested tight markets for labor and 
equipment may constrain further acceleration in drilling 
activity. 
Agriculture 
Drought conditions plagued much of Texas, severely so 
in the Texas panhandle. Lack of soil moisture particularly 
affected winter wheat, and the crop was largely in poor 
to very poor condition. Pasture conditions were also 
negatively impacted, and some ranchers were moving 
cattle from grazing to feedlots earlier than usual. Texas 
will see an increase in cotton acres this year, according 
to contacts, driven by strong demand, relatively high 
cotton prices, and new provisions in the farm bill. Cattle 
prices declined over the reporting period, and milk prices 
remained low enough to start forcing some smaller dair-
ies out of business. Trade issues continued to make 
agricultural producers and lenders nervous. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of late 
February through early April. Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and upward wage pressures persisted. Price 
inflation increased modestly. Sales of retail goods were down slightly, while growth in consumer and business services 
remained solid. Conditions in the manufacturing sector picked up modestly, and activity in the agriculture sector was flat. 
Contacts reported that residential real estate market activity continued at a strong pace, and conditions in the commer-
cial real estate sector were solid. Lending activity ticked up. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts across the District continued to report tight 
labor market conditions and persistent upward wage 
pressures in various sectors. Demand for workers expe-
rienced in cybersecurity was up. Metals manufacturers 
reported a modest uptick in employment growth. A con-
tact in real estate development in Northern California 
observed that demand for contract labor exceeded sup-
ply, causing wages to jump. Labor demand in the utilities 
sector declined somewhat as sales weakened. Employ-
ers faced difficulties in filling vacancies in both high- and 
low-skill positons. In response to labor shortages, sever-
al contacts reported increased use of overtime and 
heightened efforts to automate routine tasks. In Los 
Angeles, a contact in the air transportation sector imple-
mented process improvements that substituted infor-
mation technology for labor in customer interactions. In 
some areas of California, high costs of living made it 
difficult to attract job candidates. The recent corporate 
tax cut resulted in some one-time bonuses and a small 
increase in entry-level wages, according to a few con-
tacts.  
Prices  
Price inflation increased modestly over the reporting 
period. Strong construction activity drove further price 
inflation for a wide variety of building materials, including 
lumber and sheetrock. Contacts reported a jump in 
inflationary pressures for metals prices, partly due to the 
anticipation of tariffs and unrelated increases in raw 
material costs. Airfares picked up modestly following 
further industry consolidation and oil price increases. 
Pharmaceutical prices inched up, resulting in a slight 
increase in health insurance costs for a Mountain West 
health-care provider. Retail sales prices were broadly flat 
to down slightly, with the impact of increased competition 
in low-cost product spaces mostly offset by the effect of 
strong demand for high-end goods. Wheat prices de-
creased modestly due to excess supply. Declines in 
natural gas prices put downward pressure on heating 
prices across the District. 
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods were down slightly over the report-
ing period. Contacts in the Mountain West noted that bad 
weather in the past month had a negative impact on 
sales activity in their region. Demand for motor vehicles 
slowed modestly because of increasing financing costs. 
The restaurant industry continued to see foot traffic edge 
down. While mall-based retail activity had been trending 
down, recently, stores have maintained sales volumes 
while managing inventories tightly. 
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
remained solid. Demand for airline travel was strong, 
especially from international passengers following im-
provements in the global economy. Contacts in Los 
Angeles noted a pickup in tourism activity. Demand for 
freight airline services was at its highest level since the 
The Beige Book ■ April 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
recession. A major health insurance provider in Utah 
reported significant competition in the commercial pro-
vider market.  
Manufacturing 
Conditions in manufacturing picked up modestly. Capaci-
ty utilization across a range of manufacturing sectors, 
including steel, picked up noticeably despite rising input 
prices. Inventories in some sectors ticked up because of 
a slight decline in export growth, according to a contact 
in Northern California. Both deliveries and new orders of 
commercial aircraft edged down on a year-over-year 
basis. A contact in the metals industry noted greater 
uncertainty about production costs because materials 
suppliers would not enter price guarantee agreements.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector was flat on balance. 
Wheat yields were up modestly across the District. De-
mand in the feedlot industry inched up on a year-over-
year basis. Cattle profits were solid, though margins 
narrowed. Demand for electricity in Southern California 
was flat, leading excess capacity in power generation to 
edge up in the region. Grain inventories remained elevat-
ed in the Mountain West, and sales contracts fell over 
the reporting period. Contacts noted that much of the 
grain industry continued to face prices below breakeven 
levels.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets continued at a strong 
pace. Construction in the residential market picked up 
noticeably, limited only by the persistent shortage of 
labor and increasing material costs. Contacts across the 
District observed a solid increase in housing starts, 
especially for single-family homes, though lengthy per-
mitting processes acted as an additional headwind. 
Construction starts on middle- to high-end units grew 
faster than that of more-affordable units because rising 
input costs jeopardized returns in lower-end markets. 
Throughout the District, increases in demand amidst still-
low inventory levels caused residential sale prices to rise 
further. Contacts in the Pacific Northwest reported a 
jump in apartment rents. Commercial real estate activity 
moderated to a solid pace. Contacts in Eastern Wash-
ington reported a modest decline in permitting for com-
mercial projects on a year-over-year basis. Demand for 
warehouse space for shipping fulfillment operations was 
up across the District. Some regions of the District cited 
rising financing costs as a growing constraint on com-
mercial real estate activity.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked up over the reporting period. Loan 
demand was mixed but increased slightly overall. Strong 
loan demand in Oregon resulted in a modest jump in 
lending rates. Contacts in Northern California reported 
moderate growth in consumer loan demand, while com-
mercial demand fell modestly. On balance, deposit rates 
edged up and net interest margins remained narrow. 
Asset quality remained solid. In Oregon, underwriting 
standards for residential development loans tightened 
moderately.■ 


