The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
September 2, 2020 
August 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
based on information collected on or before August 24, 2020. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity increased among most Districts, but gains were generally modest and activity remained well below 
levels prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Manufacturing rose in most Districts, which coincided with increased activity at 
ports and among transportation and distribution firms. Consumer spending continued to pick up, sparked by strong 
vehicle sales and some improvements in tourism and retail sectors. But many Districts noted a slowing pace of growth 
in these areas, and total spending was still far below pre-pandemic levels. Commercial construction was down widely, 
and commercial real estate remained in contraction. Conversely, residential construction was a bright spot, showing 
growth and resilience in many Districts. Residential real estate sales were also notably higher, with prices continuing to 
rise along with demand and a shortage of inventory. In the banking sector, overall loan demand increased slightly, led 
by solid residential mortgage activity. Agricultural conditions continued to suffer from low prices, and energy activity 
was subdued at low levels, with little expectation of near-term improvement for either sector. While the overall outlook 
among contacts was modestly optimistic, a few Districts noted some pessimism. Continued uncertainty and volatility 
related to the pandemic, and its negative effect on consumer and business activity, was a theme echoed across the 
country.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment increased overall among Districts, with gains in manufacturing cited most often. However, some Districts 
also reported slowing job growth and increased hiring volatility, particularly in service industries, with rising instances of 
furloughed workers being laid off permanently as demand remained soft. Firms continued to experience difficulty find-
ing necessary labor, a matter compounded by day care availability, as well as uncertainty over the coming school year 
and jobless benefits. Wages were flat to slightly higher in most Districts, with greater pressure cited among lower-
paying positions. Some firms also rescinded previous pay cuts. Others, however, have looked to roll back hazard pay 
for high-exposure jobs, though some have chosen not to do so for staff morale and recruitment purposes.  
Prices 
Price pressures increased since the last report but remained modest. While input prices generally rose faster than 
selling prices, they were moderate overall. Notable exceptions included inputs experiencing demand surges or supply-
chain disruptions, such as structural lumber, for which prices spiked. Several Districts also reported that costs for per-
sonal protective equipment and inputs to it remained elevated. Freight transportation rates rose in several Districts due 
to a resurgence in demand. In contrast, contacts in multiple Districts cited weak demand or lack of pricing power as a 
factor behind slower growth in retail or other selling prices.  
Boston 
Business contacts continued to cite the disruptive effects 
of the pandemic on all aspects of their activity, even as 
recovery began or continued in some sectors. Employ-
ees of some firms were called back, while others re-
mained on furlough or have permanently lost jobs. The 
strength of the region’s housing markets in July provided 
some support for contacts’ optimism that the pandemic 
merely delayed the usual spring rebound.  
New York 
Growth in the regional economy has stalled in recent 
weeks, with activity still well below pre-pandemic levels. 
Retail activity and the single-family housing market have 
continued to improve. The labor market remains weak, 
and hiring activity has slowed. Selling prices and wages 
have been mostly steady, on balance.  
  
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Business activity was flat during the current Beige Book 
period and remained far below levels attained prior to the 
onset of COVID-19. Firms continued to face hiring diffi-
culties, and wages trended higher for low-wage jobs. 
Prices also trended slightly higher amid ongoing price 
spikes. Uncertainty is extremely high as contacts await 
layoffs, evictions, foreclosures, and bankruptcies while 
the coronavirus persists and the stimulus ends.  
Cleveland 
The region’s economy grew modestly and at a pace 
similar to that of the previous reporting period. However, 
activity remained below pre-pandemic levels across 
most sectors. Staff levels changed very little and wages 
were mostly steady. Price pressures increased some-
what as input costs increased. Contacts expected mod-
erate improvement in customer demand, although ex-
pectations have been scaled back.   
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy continued to improve in re-
cent weeks, but activity remained considerably below pre
-pandemic levels in most segments. A few notable areas 
of strength were auto sales, existing home sales, and 
trucking shipments. Employment continued to increase, 
but the pace of hiring slowed compared with our prior 
report. Price growth picked up but remained modest 
overall.  
Atlanta 
Economic conditions were mixed. Labor markets im-
proved modestly, and nonlabor costs were subdued. 
Certain retail segments were strong, while others report-
ed softness. Tourism activity remained soft. Residential 
real estate conditions improved, and commercial real 
estate activity was mixed. Manufacturing activity in-
creased. Banking conditions rebounded slightly.  
Chicago 
Economic activity increased strongly, but the pace of 
growth slowed, and activity remained below pre-
pandemic levels. Employment and manufacturing in-
creased strongly, consumer spending and construction 
and real estate increased moderately, and business 
spending increased slightly. Wages increased slightly, 
and prices rose modestly. Financial conditions improved 
modestly. The pandemic continued to weigh on agricul-
ture.  
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic activity has increased modestly but was highly 
variable across sectors. Auto dealers reported strong 
sales, and restaurants reported some improvement. 
Tourism and hospitality contacts reported that higher 
COVID-19 cases over the past month have reduced 
demand. The outlook among contacts remains pessimis-
tic, on net, but has improved slightly since our previous 
report.  
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity rose modestly. Job post-
ings rose, but many firms expressed concern about 
future demand. Some segments of consumer spending 
and tourism saw improvements, while many services 
firms reported decline. Despite an overall pullback in 
new construction projects, residential building showed 
signs of resilience. Crop conditions were strong but 
faced low prices, and oil production fell significantly.  
Kansas City 
Economic activity strengthened moderately but remained 
below pre-pandemic levels in many sectors. Consumer 
spending increased moderately, with gains in retail, auto, 
restaurant, and tourism sales. Residential home sales 
and prices also rose moderately, but commercial real 
estate conditions worsened. Manufacturing activity ex-
panded moderately, while conditions in the energy and 
agriculture sectors remained weak.  
Dallas 
Increasing COVID-19 infections in the Eleventh District 
have disrupted the budding economic recovery in some 
sectors. While manufacturing activity continued to ex-
pand, service sector activity declined overall in July but 
resumed its nascent recovery in August. Energy activity 
remained depressed. Sharply rising home sales were a 
bright spot. Outlooks were increasingly uncertain, as 
surging COVID-19 cases disrupted business sentiment.   
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded slight-
ly. Employment levels increased marginally. Price infla-
tion remained generally unchanged. Sales of retail goods 
rose slightly, while conditions in the consumer and busi-
ness services sectors remained precarious. Activity in 
the manufacturing sector increased modestly, and the 
agriculture sector remained weak. Residential construc-
tion activity picked up briskly, while activity in the com-
mercial market increased a bit. Lending activity ticked up 
further.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity continued to pick up modestly in the First District in July and early August, even as some sectors saw 
little improvement. Some retailers cited strong activity, while air travel and hotels remained very soft. Manufacturing and 
staffing results were similarly mixed, with results largely a function of the pandemic’s effects on the sectors of the firms’ 
clients or customers. Residential real estate markets have begun to recover from the pause this spring. Commercial 
markets were split, with the retail and office sectors still very weak and warehouse and lab space robust. Outlooks con-
tinued to be highly uncertain, with more respondents expecting at least mild improvement than predicting increased 
losses. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment changes were mixed. Retail contacts selling 
autos and furniture brought back almost their entire 
workforces after layoffs and furloughs in the spring. By 
contrast, many hotel workers remained furloughed, 
particularly food and beverage staff that typically work 
larger functions. Similarly, an aviation and auto industry 
supplier furloughed large numbers of employees and 
recently announced an 8 percent permanent staff reduc-
tion. Some manufacturing contacts giving “hazard pay” 
to employees said they planned to stop doing so, but 
one said that they would continue the practice for fear of 
damaging morale. Staffing firms also noted that hazard 
pay for some jobs had been eliminated. Some clients of 
staffing firms raised pay compared to pre-pandemic 
levels to enhance recruitment.  
Prices  
Contacts again said little about prices. Manufacturing 
contacts continued to report a benign pricing environ-
ment. A milk producer said raw milk prices were very low 
due to decreased demand from restaurants. 
Retail and Tourism 
Respondents continued to report major disruptions relat-
ed to COVID-19, though some noted improvements 
since the spring. After limited in-person shopping, car 
sales in Connecticut were strong throughout June, July, 
and the start of August, except for the week that rem-
nants of Hurricane Isaias caused power outages 
throughout the state. A furniture retailer reported aver-
age weekly sales up 30 percent compared to last sum-
mer, with weekly online sales up more than 300 percent 
compared with the same weeks in 2019 and in-store 
sales roughly one-third of pre-pandemic levels.  
Restaurants across Massachusetts dramatically in-
creased outdoor dining options. Over one-third of restau-
rant sales came from outdoor dining, which is unusual in 
Massachusetts where fewer than 20 percent of restau-
rants had outdoor dining options before the pandemic. 
Restaurants in coastal areas operated at around 75 
percent of their usual sales, on average, while those in 
Boston were faring worse than the rest of the state. 
Travel industry contacts reported hotel stays continued 
to be impacted significantly by the pandemic, with occu-
pancy rates in Boston remaining under 20 percent. 
Some hotels will be housing college students for the fall 
semester to alleviate density in dormitories. Conventions 
scheduled into the first quarter of 2021 in Boston have 
been postponed. Air traffic into Logan remained low, with 
reductions of more than 85 percent in domestic passen-
gers and more than 95 percent in international travelers. 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Experiences diverged markedly across the ten manufac-
turing firms contacted this cycle. Firms with exposure to 
home goods, semiconductors, and health care reported 
strong results, even compared with a year ago, while 
firms with exposure to aviation and automotive continued 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

A-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
to suffer. A manufacturer and retailer of furniture report-
ed that sales in the summer were up 30 percent year-on-
year. Semiconductor firms reported significant increases 
in sales which they attributed to demand for devices and 
the upcoming release of a new iPhone. By contrast, a 
firm that makes parts for jet engines reported that sales 
were down 60 percent; OEM demand was down and 
aftermarket demand more or less vanished as airlines 
were not using their planes and were also trying to 
conserve cash. 
One manufacturer said that they were increasing capital 
expenditures both because of discounts on capital goods 
and because they wanted to be in position to take mar-
ket share when the economy recovers. Other firms said 
they faced COVID-related delays in construction or 
acquisition of capital goods. The commercial aviation-
related contact cut capital expenditures substantially.  
Contacts said they expected current performance, 
whether good or bad, to continue in the near term. 
Staffing Services 
New England staffing firms reported mixed business 
results into August, reflecting their different industry 
exposures. Firms that provide services to COVID-related 
industries, particularly healthcare, continued to see 
improvement and business growth since the spring. Most 
contacts indicated that labor demand is the same as or 
higher than in the spring. Some client organizations 
called back temporary workers whose jobs could not be 
done remotely; some moved from entirely virtual hiring to 
conducting the last round of interviews on-site.  
Labor supply was described as complex. The majority of 
contacts reported difficulty finding candidates who were 
willing to work, especially for pay rates that might be 
lower than pandemic-augmented unemployment bene-
fits. A lack of access to daycare and unwillingness of 
some working parents to send their children to daycare 
contributed to a reduced pool of candidates. By contrast, 
one contact saw increased applicants, citing recent 
layoffs and furloughs as driving factors. 
Overall, respondents remained cautious about the uncer-
tainty of the COVID situation and the upcoming election. 
The majority of contacts were somewhat more optimistic 
than three months ago, but a few were less optimistic 
and expected business activity to slow in Q3 and Q4. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Around the First District, the office and retail property 
sectors experienced ongoing weakness while markets 
for warehouse and lab space remained robust. Office 
leasing activity remained limited to renewal of expiring 
leases, and tenants sought renewals of only 1 to 3 years’ 
duration. The supply of office space for sublease in-
creased by a significant margin, with the office vacancy 
rate in downtown Boston—including sublease supply—
rising to an estimated 11 percent in August from roughly 
6 percent in March. Office asking rents were steady, but 
effective rents declined amid increased leasing conces-
sions. Office sales transactions were close to zero and 
office construction was limited to projects that were 
underway before the pandemic.  
The District’s industrial property markets saw continued 
robust demand, as online retailers further expanded their 
warehouse and distribution space. Demand for laborato-
ry space in greater Boston stayed very strong; one con-
tact raised concerns of a potential glut of lab space when 
planned projects are completed. The retail sector re-
mained weak apart from grocery-anchored shopping 
centers and pharmacies; contacts cited an uptick in 
closures of small businesses. A regional lender to com-
mercial real estate saw steady loan volume as well as a 
modest increase in requests for loan payment deferrals.  
Contacts expected commercial real estate activity to stay 
flat or decline further for the remainder of 2020 and 
expressed a very uncertain outlook for 2021. Some were 
concerned that commercial bankruptcies and foreclo-
sures would accelerate in coming quarters without re-
newed fiscal stimulus measures. 
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District began 
to pick up in July, following slow sales this spring due to 
the outbreak of COVID-19. (Boston and Vermont report-
ed year-over-year changes from June 2019 to June 
2020.  Connecticut data were unavailable. The other four 
New England states reported statistics through July.) 
Closed sales for single-family homes increased for all 
areas reporting July statistics. Condo sales increased in 
July in New Hampshire and Maine, and decreased by 
about 1 percent in Rhode Island and Massachusetts. 
Across the region, contacts were optimistic that sales 
activity would continue at a high level into the fall. 
Markets continued to favor sellers. Inventory decreased 
for both single family homes and condos in all reporting 
areas, with all markets except the Boston condo market 
experiencing double-digit drops. Median sales prices 
rose in all markets except for Boston condos. Additional-
ly, both the Massachusetts and Boston contacts noticed 
increased moves from urban to suburban locations, 
which they attributed in part to the pandemic.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional‐economy  

B-1
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic growth in the Second District economy has stalled in the latest reporting period, even as the spread of the 
virus has remained subdued and more businesses have gradually reopened. Employment overall has been little 
changed, though retailers and wholesalers have reported staff increases, as more restrictions have been lifted. Input 
prices accelerated somewhat, while selling prices have remained steady. Retail activity continued to expand, though it 
remains well below pre-pandemic levels, while tourism and travel have remained depressed. Home sales have been 
mixed, with the single-family sales market strengthening but other segments flat to weaker. Commercial real estate 
markets have softened further—particularly for office and retail space.  Residential and commercial construction activity 
has remained weak. Finally, banks reported increased loan demand, tighter credit standards, and further widespread 
increases in delinquency rates. Overall, business contacts have become less optimistic about the near-term outlook. 
  
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has been generally flat since the last 
report, though retailers and wholesalers indicated that 
they had added staff as more restrictions have been 
lifted. A major upstate New York employment agency 
and a payroll processing firm both reported that hiring 
activity has picked up somewhat since midyear. Howev-
er, a major New York City agency specializing in office 
jobs indicated that hiring has remained sluggish, as 
fewer people are leaving jobs and companies have been 
reluctant to on-board new workers remotely. These 
contacts noted a marked increase in job seekers. 
Some businesses have noted less trouble bringing back 
furloughed workers and hiring new ones in recent weeks, 
as unemployment benefits were scaled back. However, 
a number of companies noted that concerns about child 
care and the upcoming school year remain constraints 
on worker availability.   
Business contacts have mixed expectations about their 
likely staffing levels in the months ahead. While more 
manufacturers said they anticipated staff increases than 
reductions, the reverse was true among service sector 
businesses—especially those in the information, trans-
portation, and warehousing industries. 
Wages have generally been mixed but mostly steady, on 
balance, with declines in leisure & hospitality, infor-
mation, and wholesale trade, but increases in retail, real 
estate, and construction. Looking ahead, businesses 
generally expect wages to remain steady.  
Prices  
Business contacts reported that input costs accelerated 
slightly, rising at a moderate pace, while selling prices 
were mixed but, on balance, little changed. While con-
tacts in the finance and professional & business service 
sectors reported declines in selling prices, retailers noted 
some escalation in prices for the first time since the 
outbreak began in March, reflecting widespread increas-
es in input costs.  Notably, businesses in the leisure & 
hospitality and retail & wholesale trade sectors were 
somewhat more inclined to raise prices in the months 
ahead.   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers generally reported that sales, though still down 
substantially from a year ago, picked up in July and into 
August, as restrictions were lifted further. However, 
some reported softening in revenues in mid-August.  A 
number of retail contacts mentioned difficulties in getting 
supplies on time. Some have also noted that safety 
concerns and capacity restrictions have limited customer 
traffic.   
New vehicle sales softened in the latest reporting period, 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
following a fairly strong rebound in May and June, ac-
cording to dealers in upstate New York.  This recent 
pullback is partly attributed to low inventories and re-
duced incentives, though inventory levels are expected 
to improve in the fall. Sales of used vehicles have re-
mained strong in recent weeks, with no significant inven-
tory problems reported. Credit conditions were reported 
to be in good shape. 
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturing growth has slowed to a crawl in the latest 
reporting period, while activity in the wholesale trade and 
transportation & warehousing sectors has contracted 
modestly. A number of contacts in these sectors have 
noted difficulties and delays in getting a variety of inputs. 
Looking ahead, manufacturers projected moderate 
growth in activity, while wholesalers and transportation & 
warehousing contacts anticipated little change. Busi-
nesses’ overall capital spending plans remain de-
pressed, though there have been scattered reports of 
companies investing in air filtration systems and other 
such equipment to enhance safety.   
Services 
Service industry contacts generally reported that busi-
ness activity has weakened since the last report and 
remains well below pre-pandemic levels. Information and 
professional & business services firms reported fairly 
widespread declines in activity, while those in leisure & 
hospitality and education & health reported flat to mod-
estly declining activity. The falloff in economic activity in 
central business districts, most notably Manhattan, has 
distressed local businesses that provide services to 
offices and workers, as well as firms throughout the 
metro area that service them. Contacts at both business 
service and consumer service firms generally anticipated 
little change in business activity the months ahead.    
Tourism has remained depressed, with New York City 
hotels still running at well under half capacity, though 
weekend occupancies have increased. Hotels have also 
seen some business as homeless shelter alternatives. 
Ongoing restrictions on capacity, as well as trepidation 
among customers, have restrained business at restau-
rants, hotels, and other providers of consumer leisure 
and recreation services. A large expansion in outdoor 
dining has helped mitigate New York City’s ongoing ban 
on indoor dining, though many restaurants have still 
seen sizable reductions in overall capacity.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have continued to 
diverge, as New York City’s sales and rental markets 
weakened further, while markets elsewhere—particularly 
for single-family homes—have generally continued to 
show strength.  
New York City’s rental market has been particularly 
weak, with vacancy rates reaching multi-year highs in 
Manhattan and rents down roughly 10 percent from a 
year ago with increased landlord concessions. Rents 
declined more moderately in Brooklyn and Queens, and 
were little changed in the Bronx and across outlying 
portions of the metro area. The single-family rental mar-
ket has been relatively strong across much of the Dis-
trict.  
The residential sales market has been mixed. Sales of 
condos and co-ops in New York City have rebounded 
modestly from depressed spring levels, while prices 
have fallen, as the number of listings has swelled. Else-
where across the District, though, home prices have 
risen and bidding wars have been common, reflecting 
strong pent-up demand and a dearth of homes on the 
market, which has also restrained sales volume.   
Commercial real estate markets have weakened further. 
Office availability rates continued to rise, while rents 
were flat or declining. Retail rents have also been flat to 
lower, as vacancy rates have risen to multi-year highs.  
New construction activity has remained quite sluggish 
and well below year-earlier levels, though a few areas 
have seen a pickup in multifamily construction starts. 
Contacts in real estate and construction have become 
less optimistic, on balance, about the near term outlook. 
Banking and Finance 
Finance sector contacts generally noted continued weak 
business and have grown more pessimistic about the 
near term outlook. Small to medium-sized banks across 
the District reported higher demand for consumer loans, 
residential mortgages, and commercial mortgages, but 
flat demand for commercial and industrial loans and little 
change in refinancing activity. Bankers reported tight-
ened credit standards across all loan categories except 
consumer loans, where standards were unchanged. 
Banks reported narrowing spreads across all loan cate-
gories and lower average deposit rates. Delinquency 
rates rose across all categories—particularly on residen-
tial mortgages—though banks continued to report more 
lenient policies for delinquent accounts across all cate-
gories. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Third District business activity changed little overall during the current Beige Book period and remained far below levels 
observed prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Business operations increased incrementally, as COVID-19 
caseloads remained at relatively low levels throughout the period. As firms recalled more of their workforce, net employ-
ment also grew modestly; however, firms also continued to issue permanent layoffs. Some wage increases were noted 
among lower-paying jobs. Meanwhile, contacts reported ongoing difficulties attracting workers. Prices edged higher 
again amid continued spotty price spikes. Firms maintained modestly positive expectations for growth over the next six 
months; however, uncertainty is extremely high, as contacts worried about the end of stimulus measures, pending 
layoffs, and an inevitable rise of evictions, foreclosures, and bankruptcies. Looming over all is the active presence of the 
coronavirus. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased modestly overall as firms 
stepped up hiring and recalling workers; however, layoffs 
continued as well. Among firms in our COVID-19 survey, 
25 percent reported that they had hired new workers in 
July, and 13 percent recalled furloughed workers. Mean-
while, about 6 percent of the firms had laid off workers 
permanently, and another 6 percent had furloughed 
workers. However, at mid-August, a slightly greater 
percentage of firms reported that employment had de-
clined over the month than had increased. 
Staffing firms reported that activity continued to increase 
but remained below pre-pandemic levels by as much as 
30 percent. Staffing contacts noted far more orders than 
they can fill with available labor, and they worried – as 
the school year neared – that childcare issues will further 
reduce the labor supply. A lack of childcare was also the 
only impediment cited by a greater percentage of firms in 
our COVID-19 survey in late July than in early July. Fear 
of infection and expanded unemployment benefits had 
become lesser concerns. From a separate July survey of 
Philadelphia’s Center City offices, a vaccine was the 
overwhelming factor that firms required for a return from 
remote work; safer transit was a distant second.  
Wages appeared to trend slightly upward. In mid-August, 
the percentage of nonmanufacturing firms reporting 
higher wage and benefit costs per employee was higher 
than the percentage reporting lower costs. Manufactur-
ers anticipate compensation costs to rise 3 percent over 
the next year – a bit higher than last quarter.  
Several firms maintained previously imposed salary cuts 
on higher-paid positions, but further cuts were not report-
ed. Upward wage pressure is most evident for lower-
wage jobs, especially for Pennsylvania firms that are 
paying closer to the federal minimum than to the $15 an 
hour, or more, being offered by many warehouses. Also, 
some firms found it difficult to end the temporary “hero” 
pay and have made all or part of it permanent.  
Prices  
Prices edged higher again, as more contacts reported 
higher prices rather than lower during the period, except 
for prices received by nonmanufacturers. However, over 
60 percent of all firms noted no change in prices.  
Contacts continued to describe spotty price surges as 
demand shifts, production disruptions, and logistics 
problems have created scarcity, delays, and price hikes 
for an ongoing parade of commodities. Scarcity and high 
prices for lumber continued to plague builders.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturers reported little or no change 
in activity during the current period. In our COVID-19 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
survey, manufacturing firms began the period with sales 
and new orders of about 11 percent below what had 
been anticipated pre-pandemic. Firms reported that 
demand was about 14 percent below expectations as of 
the end of July.  
In contrast, positive but low diffusion indexes for ship-
ments and for new orders from a mid-August survey 
suggested the possibility of slight growth. However, both 
indexes had fallen since mid-July, indicating that growth 
was less widespread among firms and that the overall 
direction of change was less certain.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales leveled off over the 
period – remaining below expectations by 5 to 20 per-
cent, depending on the retail segment (restaurants would 
be lower). Contacts continued to note some pickup in 
market share as some of their competitors had closed 
permanently. Most restaurants are cobbling sales togeth-
er from a mix of sit-down dining, takeout/delivery, cater-
ing, and groceries. A heavy reliance on outdoor seating 
has contacts nervous as colder weather approaches.  
Demand remained strong for auto sales; however, low 
inventories kept new car sales steady at levels about 15 
percent below the prior year. However, prices rose and 
used car sales were strong, so dealer profits were also 
stronger and sometimes record-setting.  
Tourism picked up slightly, following a partial recovery 
last period. However, overall activity was about 40 per-
cent below prior-year levels. Contacts described good 
activity at open-air resort destinations but still less than 
in recent years. Attractions, business travel, and urban 
destinations remain depressed.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonmanufacturers reported a slight increase in activity, 
but levels remained well below pre-pandemic expecta-
tions. In our COVID-19 survey, nonmanufacturing firms 
began the period with demand about 23 percent below 
what had been anticipated; this improved slightly to 21 
percent below expectations as of the end of July.  
Financial Services 
The volume of bank lending continued to hold steady 
over the period, in contrast to the same period in 2019, 
during which loan volumes continued growing moderate-
ly. Residential mortgages grew moderately during the 
period, and auto loans and commercial real estate lend-
ing grew modestly. However, these gains were offset by 
moderate declines in commercial and industrial loans. 
Credit card volumes continued falling moderately; last 
year, they rose moderately over the same period.  
Banking contacts continued to report that government 
stimulus and moratoriums on evictions and foreclosures 
had worked well for most households and businesses. 
Many creditors have already resumed payments. How-
ever, there was universal concern about the outcome 
once stimulus measures and protections end.  
Accountants and attorneys agreed. With moratoriums in 
place on foreclosures and evictions, the most serious 
consequences, thus far, had been a rise in corporate 
bankruptcies, especially in retail and hospitality. There 
were also reports of small business closings, but these 
are difficult to catalog and some simply shut their doors 
without leaving a trace. However, they expect a wave of 
foreclosure/eviction cases when the moratoriums end.  
One attorney noted that banks were working with clients 
to form new payment plans. However, he said that col-
lection rates have gone down significantly and “at some 
point, defaults need to happen.” Attorneys and account-
ants worried that clients were too complacent – believing 
that another round of assistance would occur. Others 
noted that increasing numbers of apartment tenants and 
small businesses had begun skipping payments. Several 
contacts at one law firm agreed that “this is a disaster 
waiting to happen.”  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported modest growth in sales activity 
that has kept contractors busy at levels comparable with 
recent years and created problems securing lumber and 
labor. Existing home sales grew moderately – July sales 
had returned to levels comparable with the prior year. 
Contacts described very strong demand – driven by low 
interest rates and well-heeled consumers searching for 
more space. However, inventories continued falling, 
driving prices higher and constraining potential sales 
growth.  
Philadelphia’s commercial real estate construction grew 
modestly and leveled off at about 15 percent below the 
level of activity anticipated before the pandemic. Crew-
size reductions for worker safety are the primary reason, 
but the pipeline for projects beyond the first quarter of 
2021 is thin. Commercial office leasing activity declined 
slightly, as firms continued to delay decisions while many 
workers remain remote and potential layoffs lie ahead. 
Demand remains strong for warehousing and positive for 
life science activities, but weak for retail space. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fourth District’s economy grew modestly and at a pace similar to that of the previous reporting period. However, 
sales and activity generally remained below pre-pandemic levels across most sectors. Staff levels changed very little in 
all sectors, even as business activity continued to increase. Consequently, wages were mostly steady. Input cost pres-
sures increased somewhat as prices for construction materials, metals, and materials used in pandemic-related medical 
equipment rose. Selling prices rose moderately as some of those costs were passed through to customers. Moreover, 
strong demand and low inventories helped to push up prices for vehicles and homes. Looking ahead, contacts expected 
moderate improvement in customer demand, although expectations have been scaled back since the previous reporting 
period because of the uncertainty of the coronavirus’s path. Contacts expected to add staff slowly in the months ahead, 
and the majority of firms believed that by next spring, their staff levels would still be below pre-pandemic levels. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand remained weak, and staff levels changed 
by little in all sectors, even as business activity in-
creased. Fewer firms reduced staff levels in the past two 
months than in the previous period. However, only about 
one-fourth of contacts added workers, a share which 
was unchanged from the previous period. Firms noted 
that the weak level of customer demand was the primary 
reason for their lackluster hiring activity. Although the 
labor market is more stable than it was during the spring, 
a few firms reported that previously furloughed workers 
have recently been laid off permanently—a sign that the 
labor market’s recovery may not be smooth. Contacts 
expected to add staff slowly, and the majority of firms 
believed that by next spring their staff levels would still 
be below pre-pandemic levels. Most believed customer 
demand would not be strong enough to support pre-
pandemic staff levels, but a sizeable minority noted their 
firms had become more efficient and did not need as 
many workers as they had at the beginning of the year.  
Wages were mostly steady, with 8 out of 10 firms report-
ing no change in the past two months and with fewer 
firms cutting pay. Where pay increases were noted, a 
number of staffing agencies reported that before en-
hanced unemployment benefits had expired, the benefits 
motivated them to raise wages to attract workers. Also, a 
few firms reported that professional staff whose wages 
had been previously cut have had those wages restored. 
 
Prices  
Nonlabor costs rose modestly after they had been flat or 
slightly lower in the prior two reporting periods. Construc-
tion firms widely reported that shortages of materials had 
caused input costs to rise. This was especially true of 
lumber. Manufacturers noted that prices rose for materi-
als that were in limited supply and were also used for 
medical equipment, such as plastics or materials used in 
masks. Price increases for certain metals such as zinc, 
copper, and aluminum were also reported. Multiple firms 
in construction, manufacturing, and retail reported higher 
operating costs because of increased expenditures for 
personal protective equipment, extra sanitation 
measures brought about by COVID-19, and, in some 
cases, staggered shifts.  
Selling prices rose modestly, although there was varia-
tion across sectors. Most firms held their prices un-
changed because of weak demand. Among sectors in 
which price increases were noted, higher materials costs 
boosted new-home prices. Auto dealers commented that 
low inventories of vehicles were pushing up prices for 
new and used cars. Further, transportation firms noted 
that increased cargo volumes gave them enough pricing 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
power to raise their prices.  
Consumer Spending 
Most retailers reported an increase in consumer spend-
ing since the last report. However, demand remained 
below its pre-pandemic level, and sales growth lost 
momentum in July. Auto dealers indicated that sales had 
increased significantly in June, although some momen-
tum was lost in July because of unusually low inventories 
caused by factory shutdowns in the spring. Similarly, one 
large department store reported that sales plateaued in 
July. Furthermore, an apparel retailer commented that it 
did not see the usual boost to sales during the back-to-
school season because many schools were planning to 
go virtual. Most restauranteurs reported that carryout 
and delivery orders continued to be strong, but the num-
ber of dine-in customers remained very low. Hoteliers 
noted there was some improvement in occupancy rela-
tive to that of a few months ago, but the lack of business 
travel and group events were major drags on the sector’s 
recovery. Looking ahead, contacts expressed uncertain-
ty regarding the outlook for consumer spending, citing 
the path of the virus, future of fiscal stimulus, and reo-
pening of schools as major unknowns.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity improved slightly, although there 
was variation in performance and production remains 
below pre-pandemic levels. Steelmakers saw a boost to 
sales from the growth in auto production and from cus-
tomers who were making purchases that had been de-
layed. Food and beverage producers also noted growth, 
thanks to continued growth in consumer spending. Also, 
strength in residential construction boosted demand for 
electrical equipment used in homes. However, demand 
in the aerospace sector continued to decline, as air 
travel remains weak. Moreover, a sizeable share of 
producers that serve a range of markets reported that 
uncertainty about the economic outlook had caused their 
customers to either reduce or delay their orders for capi-
tal goods. On balance, contacts expect demand to im-
prove slowly over the next few months, although expec-
tations have been scaled back since the previous period. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders and realtors widely reported that activity in 
the housing market continued to be strong. According to 
contacts, low mortgage rates and tight inventories of 
homes spurred home sales by creating a sense of ur-
gency among homebuyers. Realtors noted that the low 
level of housing inventory also helped to boost prices. 
Renovation activity was reportedly strong as more home-
owners expect to work from home for an extended time. 
Residential builders and real estate agents expect activi-
ty to remain at its current high levels in the near term. 
By contrast, nonresidential real estate activity weakened. 
Builders reported diminished backlogs of new public 
projects, a situation which they believed could be a result 
of constrained government budgets. Demand for private-
sector projects was reportedly flat, and contacts expect 
little improvement given the economy’s uncertain path. 
Moreover, commercial real estate developers expressed 
concern that a rising number of mall tenants could be 
insolvent if economic conditions do not improve soon. 
 
Financial Services 
Banking activity softened during the reporting period. 
Contacts noted that demand for business loans declined 
as the Paycheck Protection Program wound down. This 
decrease was partially mitigated by strong demand for 
purchase mortgages, mortgage refinancing, and auto 
loans. Delinquency rates of commercial and consumer 
loans remained relatively low because of forbearance 
agreements and various fiscal relief measures. However, 
if the economy remains weak, most contacts expect 
delinquencies to rise as consumer and commercial de-
ferral programs end. Bankers were uncertain about the 
future, particularly because of the lack of clarity about 
future government stimulus and the path of the corona-
virus.   
Professional and Business Services 
Most professional services firms reported stronger busi-
ness activity. IT firms experienced strong demand as 
firms adapted to a virtual work environment. Demand for 
payroll processing increased as more businesses reo-
pened, and the continued shift toward online purchases 
heightened demand for transaction authentication ser-
vices. An accountancy firm with a national footprint noted 
that deal flow had improved. Similarly, a large consultan-
cy reported some clients restarted longer-term projects 
that were previously put on hold. Contacts expect de-
mand to remain on a positive trajectory. 
Freight  
Demand for freight services grew moderately, thanks to 
improved manufacturing production and continued 
growth of consumer spending. A number of contacts 
reported that ongoing shortages of trucks made it difficult 
to meet customer demand. Moreover, the variation of 
businesses’ reopening across states made it difficult to 
anticipate where trucks are needed. Contacts expect 
demand for transportation service to remain stable in the 
coming months. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy continued to expand in recent weeks, but activity remained below pre-pandemic and year-
ago levels. Manufacturers experienced a moderate increase in new orders and shipments, on balance, but demand was 
described as unreliable and varied across different goods. Ports saw a modest rise in both imports and exports, but 
volumes were comparatively low. Trucking companies reported robust growth in demand, particularly for pharmaceuti-
cals, food, beverages, retail and industrial shipments. Much of retail shopping remained weak, particularly at brick and 
mortar stores. Auto sales, on the other hand, were strong. Travel and tourism activity improved slightly as short-term 
renting showed some strength. Residential home sales increased robustly and although the inventory of homes for sale 
increased recently, there were more potential buyers than homes available for purchase. Commercial real estate leasing 
was little changed, overall, although retail vacancies rose. Financial institutions reported strong demand for home pur-
chase loans and mortgage refinancing but a modest decline in lending for business investment. Overall, demand for 
nonfinancial services increased slightly, but reports varied. Some firms said that workplace safety measures led to in-
creased costs. Employment continued to increase, but the pace of hiring slowed and many businesses report having 
difficulty filling open positions. Price growth picked up in recent weeks, but remained modest, overall.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment in the Fifth District continued to rise in 
recent weeks, but the pace of hiring slowed compared to 
our previous report. There were several reports of em-
ployers having difficulty filling open positions. Some 
contacts cited skills mismatches as a barrier to finding 
the workers they needed while others believed that the 
generous unemployment insurance benefits had dis-
couraged workers from applying for available jobs. Also, 
multiple contacts said that some former employees were 
recalled but did not report back to work. Many firms said 
they were trying to figure out how to provide flexibility to 
workers with children schooling at home. On balance, 
wages were unchanged.    
Prices  
Since our previous report, price growth picked up but 
remained at a modest rate, overall. According to our 
most recent surveys, manufacturers reported a rise in 
prices paid and prices received; both of which remained 
below two percent. Service sector firms, on the other 
hand reported a slight increase in prices paid and a 
slight decline in prices received. Energy and agriculture 
commodity prices generally remained at low levels.  
  
Manufacturing 
Fifth District manufacturers reported a moderate in-
crease in shipments and new orders since our last re-
port. Several contacts said that demand was unreliable 
while others expressed concerns about growing uncer-
tainty relating to COVID and the upcoming presidential 
election. Manufacturers of food and home goods such as 
furniture reported strong business, but some manufactur-
ers further up the supply chain struggled as uncertainty 
led to caution among customers and reduced orders. 
Several companies reported that supply chain disrup-
tions were restricting production and that tariffs on inputs 
were hurting profits.   
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports saw a modest increase in shipments 
since our last report, but volumes remained below year-
ago levels. Import volumes exceeded export volumes in 
recent weeks, but exports were down less over the year 
than imports. Auto shipments increased but were gener-
ally weak on both the import and export side. Imports of 
retail goods increased, but imports of machinery, farm 
equipment, and manufacturing inputs were low. On the 
export side, shipments of apparel and agricultural prod-
ucts rose while metal exports were down. An airport saw 
strength in cargo, as an increase in medical supplies and 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
diversity of product offset weakness in auto shipments.  
Trucking volumes had strong growth in recent weeks. 
Contacts reported strength in pharmaceuticals and food 
and growth in retail, wine, and industrial shipments. 
Volumes of budget-friendly goods that have risen during 
the pandemic remained high. As demand strengthened, 
spot market rates rose, and driver shortages created 
capacity constraints. One executive reported buying 
new trucks due to strong demand. Despite strong busi-
ness right now, other truckers expressed concerns over 
economic uncertainty from the pandemic and political 
uncertainty in an election year.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail demand was little changed in recent weeks, re-
maining at low levels overall. Customer traffic was low, 
and brick and mortar stores saw low demand, as the 
market shifted toward online sellers. Retailers cited 
COVID and civil unrest as deterrents to in-person shop-
ping. Auto dealers reported strong demand, particularly 
online. Auto prices were high, boosting profits. Grocery 
stores also saw strong demand, but profit margins tight-
ened due to increased cleaning costs.  
Travel and tourism grew slightly since our last report but 
generally remained weak. Hotel occupancy was im-
proved over recent months but down significantly over 
the year. However, short-term rentals did fairly well as 
people looked for more secluded vacations or enjoyable 
places to work remotely. Travel was mostly by car, but 
tourists were willing to drive longer distances. Beaches 
had strong visitation, but museums and other indoor 
attractions were closed or saw weak visitation. Indoor 
capacity limits led restaurants to expand outdoor seat-
ing, making demand more dependent on weather. Busi-
ness travel remained low, and venues reported little to 
no demand for conferences or events. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Fifth District home sales increased robustly in recent 
weeks. Some realtors reported record months. Homes 
for sale rose from a few months ago, and demand con-
tinued to surge. Customer traffic increased, and custom-
ers were serious about buying. Days on the market fell, 
as many houses were bought sight unseen and some 
sold in hours. Home prices rose across most locations 
and price levels. Realtors attributed much of increased 
demand to low interest rates and to a desire to move 
from urban to suburban areas for larger homes with 
land.  
Commercial real estate leasing held fairly steady since 
our last report. Industrial leasing remained strong, but 
retail leasing was weak, as vacancies rose. Leasing to 
stores and restaurants was particularly soft and was 
expected to worsen with potential closures in the coming 
months. Office leasing held fairly steady, with tenants 
asking for short-term lease renewals, but there was not 
much new interest or construction in office space. Rental 
rates for retail and office were fairly stable, but many 
tenants were unable to pay rent in full due to cash flow 
issues. Multifamily leasing varied across markets as 
some urban areas saw falling rental rates and increasing 
concessions, while suburban areas had rising rental 
rates. 
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan activity improved slightly for this period, 
driven primarily by strong demand for both home pur-
chase and mortgage refinance loans. However, the 
respondents indicated a modest decline for conventional 
commercial lending, due to continued uncertainty for 
capital investment as a result of the prolonged COVID 
pandemic. Additionally, some financial institutions report-
ed tightening underwriting standards in selected com-
mercial sectors. Deposits grew moderately this period, 
despite lower rates on interest-bearing accounts, mainly 
due to federal aid disbursements. Credit quality re-
mained excellent, but a few financial institutions reported 
a slight increase in delinquencies.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms indicated a slight increase in 
demand in recent weeks, but individual reports varied 
considerably. Business that rely on events and in-person 
visits with clients, for example, reported very low levels 
of sales and revenue. Firms that provide services 
through federal government contracts, on the other 
hand, noted an increase in COVID-related contracts. A 
few businesses said that while their primary concern was 
the safety of their customers and employees, the addi-
tional safety measures were costly.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/data_analysis 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports on economic activity in the Sixth District were mixed. Labor markets continued to modestly improve as firms 
slowly recalled workers. Nonlabor costs remained muted. Retail contacts reported continued strength in the home im-
provement and renovation segment, but softness in apparel sales. Auto dealers noted sales increased since the previ-
ous report. Tourism and hospitality activity remained soft. Residential real estate continued to strengthen, however, 
commercial real estate markets remained challenged. Overall manufacturing activity accelerated somewhat, though new 
orders and production levels varied across firms. District financial institutions reported that loan growth slowed, under-
writing standards tightened, and loan loss reserves increased. 
Employment and Wages  
Although labor conditions improved modestly since the 
previous report, payrolls remain below pre-COVID levels 
and the outlook for further improvements was less cer-
tain. Firms continued to slowly recall workers as demand 
returned. However, many contacts noted that some prior 
staff cutbacks were permanent, and others had used 
attrition to reduce headcount. Among those hiring, most 
indicated that the pool of available workers was ample, 
although there were reports that unemployment insur-
ance benefits continued to present challenges attracting 
low-wage workers. Several contacts reported that em-
ployees quarantined while waiting for COVID-19 test 
results was disrupting operations. Many employers also 
expressed growing concern about workers’ abilities to 
balance workloads with the demands of childcare and a 
return to school or virtual learning environments. 
Reports on wages and compensation varied among 
contacts. Some businesses rescinded salary cuts, while 
others maintained pay cuts, froze salaries, or eliminated 
bonuses and/or contributions to 401K plans. Wage in-
creases remained concentrated at the low-end of the pay 
scale. 
Prices  
Over the reporting period, contacts continued to note 
muted input costs and little to no pricing power. Increas-
ing costs associated with personal protective equipment, 
testing, and sanitation practices to protect employees 
and customers from COVID-19 were notable, and rising 
shipping costs affected some industries, though neither 
of these costs were reportedly passed through. On bal-
ance, food prices stabilized, but shortages of some 
products caused prices to increase. The Atlanta Fed’s 
Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-
over-year unit costs increased, on average, to 1.5 per-
cent in August, up from 1.1 percent in July. Year-ahead 
expectations remained steady at 1.7 percent. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retail contacts reported continued strong demand 
in the home improvement and renovation segment. 
Clothing retailers noted lower year-over-year sales. Auto 
dealers reported continued increases in sales since the 
last report, as consumers focused on personal mobility 
versus shared transportation because of COVID-19. 
Similar to the previous report, tourism and hospitality 
contacts across the District noted that while most hotels 
and attractions reopened with limited capacity in order to 
uphold social distancing measures, both revenues and 
employment continued to be negatively impacted. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Housing demand across the District remained resilient 
over the reporting period. Pending home sales soared as 
low interest rates and pent-up demand increased hous-
ing activity. Many markets experienced supply shortag-
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
es, which accelerated upward pressure on home prices. 
Construction was unable to keep pace with the surge in 
demand experienced by homebuilders. Higher home 
prices, coupled with declining household incomes, con-
tinued to suppress home ownership affordability. Delin-
quencies remained elevated, especially in markets with 
high concentrations of workers in the leisure and hospi-
tality sector, such as in South Florida and Orlando. 
Commercial real estate (CRE) contacts reported that the 
sector continued to encounter challenges associated 
with the coronavirus pandemic. Contacts in hard hit 
sectors like retail and hospitality reported that conditions 
continued to stabilize as local economies improved. 
Owners of lower-price multifamily properties reported an 
increase in late rent payments and a softening in occu-
pancies. However, some contacts reported a decline in 
the number of tenants and borrowers seeking relief. 
While improving, low levels of tourism and travel are 
having a notable negative impact on activity across the 
hospitality and retail sectors. Investment property sales 
remained a fraction of pre-COVID levels. Contacts re-
ported that capital was readily available at banks; how-
ever, underwriting criteria tightened for the financing of 
stabilized CRE projects. Contacts reported that high-
quality asset values declined marginally, and hospitality 
and retail sector assets declined at a more accelerated 
rate. 
Manufacturing 
While most manufacturing firms reported a modest ac-
celeration in overall business activity compared with the 
previous report, the level of activity remains slightly 
below pre-COVID levels. While many contacts indicated 
that new orders and production levels increased, reports 
of subdued demand at some firms persisted. Purchasing 
managers reported a slight increase in supply delivery 
times and a decline in finished inventory levels. Expecta-
tions for future production levels increased, with nearly 
half of contacts expecting higher levels of production 
over the next six months. 
Transportation 
Transportation contacts indicated that demand was 
generally consistent with the previous reporting period. 
Activity at ports was mixed: some contacts noted contin-
ued softness in container traffic, while others reported 
increased container volumes tied to e-commerce and 
consumer goods. Exports of agricultural products such 
as wood pulp, cotton, and peanuts rose, but coal exports 
were down. Year-over-year total rail traffic declined, but 
intermodal traffic increased slightly. Trucking firms saw 
higher freight volumes, which contacts attributed to 
inventory restocking and surging online sales. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions rebounded slightly but 
continued to be impacted by issues related to COVID-19. 
Although requests for forbearance on loan payments 
declined, financial institutions increased loan loss re-
serves in preparation for increased charge-offs as the 
initial forbearance periods ended. Loan growth stalled, 
and underwriting conditions tightened for a majority of 
loan products. Compressed net interest rate margins, 
along with higher provisions for loan loss expenses and 
noninterest costs, continued to put negative pressure on 
earnings. Liquidity remained strong due to high deposit 
levels maintained by customers. 
Energy  
Energy markets continued to face a great deal of uncer-
tainty. Crude oil production remained restrained by over-
supply and weak demand. Demand for natural gas de-
clined further over the reporting period, as COVID-19 
shutdowns reduced power usage across the commercial 
and industrial segments. Reﬁneries cut back throughput 
and maintained historically low utilization rates amidst 
muted demand. Reports indicated that delayed mainte-
nance at refineries is expected to occur in the coming 
months, which contacts expect to add strain to already 
limited resources. District energy firms operating in areas 
such as oil and gas production, petrochemical refining, 
pulp and paper, and power continued to delay or halt 
projects indefinitely and reduce headcount. In contrast, 
renewables projects, including solar and wind farms and 
renewable diesel production, remained active. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained weak. Drought-free 
conditions prevailed in most parts of the District except in 
Georgia, where much of the state experienced abnor-
mally dry conditions. On a month-over-month basis, 
July’s production forecast for Florida's orange crop was 
unchanged from the previous month and remained be-
low last year’s production, while Florida's grapefruit 
production forecast was down from the previous month 
but remained ahead of last year. The USDA reported 
that in June, year-over-year prices paid to farmers were 
up for rice and soybeans but down for corn, cotton, 
cattle, broilers, eggs, and milk. On a month-over-month 
basis, prices increased for cotton, rice, soybeans, broil-
ers, and milk but decreased for corn and eggs while 
cattle prices were unchanged. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District again increased strongly in July and early August, but the pace of growth was 
slower than the prior reporting period and activity remained well below its pre-pandemic level. Contacts expected further 
growth in the coming months, but most did not expect a full recovery until at least the second half of 2021. Employment 
and manufacturing increased strongly; consumer spending and construction and real estate increased moderately; and 
business spending increased slightly. Wages increased slightly and prices rose modestly. Financial conditions also 
improved modestly. The pandemic continued to weigh on agricultural incomes. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment overall increased strongly during the report-
ing period, though a large number of contacts made little 
or no change to their staffing levels. One said that the 
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) had allowed his 
firm to retain workers during the depths of the downturn 
and was sparing them the difficulty of searching for 
workers now that activity was picking up. A number of 
contacts in manufacturing reported they were maintain-
ing higher employment levels than usual because of 
elevated rates of absenteeism as workers with a positive 
COVID test or potential exposure had to quarantine. 
Several contacts again commented that generous unem-
ployment benefits had made it difficult to bring payrolls 
back to desired levels, especially at the entry level. 
Wages increased slightly across skill levels. Benefits 
costs also moved up some. 
Prices 
Prices rose modestly in July and early August, and con-
tacts expected a similar-sized increase over the next 12 
months. Consumer prices increased moderately on 
balance, led by higher vehicle prices. Food and bever-
age prices fell a bit overall. Producer prices increased 
slightly. Input costs were up modestly, driven by rising 
raw materials and shipping costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased moderately over the 
reporting period, and sales in many sectors returned to 
near their pre-pandemic levels. Nonauto retail spending 
increased moderately. Contacts again reported robust 
gains in electronics (particularly for items that support e-
learning) and sporting goods, but disappointing sales of 
apparel and other traditional back-to-school items as 
many schools were opting for virtual learning this fall. 
Sales leveled off in the grocery and home improvement 
sectors but remained well above year-ago levels. Vehicle 
sales fell slightly from strong levels in the previous re-
porting period. Dealers said that low inventories of some 
light truck models were holding back sales but support-
ing higher prices and profitability. Boats and RV sales 
continued to be strong. Contacts in the leisure and hos-
pitality sector reported large increases in volumes, espe-
cially at hotels and restaurants, but activity remained well 
below its pre-pandemic level. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in July and early 
August. Many retailers continued to struggle with inven-
tory positions: one contact noted that nonessential retail-
ers were being “careful on inventory” and did not want to 
over-order, while others reported low inventories of light 
trucks, boats, RVs, and many grocery items. Overall, 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
manufacturers said inventories were somewhat higher 
than comfortable, and a number continued to report 
minor supply chain problems. Capital expenditures were 
little changed, and many contacts said they had paused 
expansion plans for the year. Freight transportation 
increased modestly, but remained at a low level. Com-
mercial and industrial energy consumption increased 
modestly, with higher reported usage by small commer-
cial establishments. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased moder-
ately on balance over the reporting period. Residential 
construction grew modestly, with increases in single-
family suburban building. In contrast, residential real 
estate activity increased substantially, with gains in most 
segments. Contacts noted that low interest rates were 
supporting demand. Many contacts said that demand for 
larger living spaces had increased since the pandemic 
began. Prices rose modestly, driven by low inventories of 
single-family homes. Nonresidential construction in-
creased on net, but activity remained slow. One contact 
said that financing challenges and weak demand were 
making it difficult for smaller construction firms to land 
nonresidential jobs and that larger firms were exploring 
taking on smaller projects. Commercial real estate activi-
ty decreased moderately, as demand for retail and office 
space fell. Sublease space for those segments in-
creased moderately. Demand for industrial space re-
mained solid. Rents fell modestly overall. Sales of com-
mercial properties were slow and prices fell modestly. 
Some contacts said they were waiting for prices to fall 
further before making purchases, and one contact said 
that the gap between what buyers were willing to pay 
and what sellers were willing to accept was unusually 
large. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased strongly in July and 
early August, but remained below where it was before 
the pandemic began. Auto production again grew sharp-
ly, though the pace of growth was slower than the previ-
ous reporting period. Steel production increased moder-
ately, led by increased demand from the auto and con-
struction industries. Heavy machinery manufacturers 
reported a slight decline in orders because of lower 
demand from the mining and energy sectors. Sales at 
specialty metals manufacturers increased modestly due 
to growth in demand from the auto, medical, and food 
manufacturing sectors. Demand for heavy trucks in-
creased, but remained at low levels. Manufacturers of 
building materials reported a modest increase in ship-
ments. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly on balance over 
the reporting period. Participants in the equity and bond 
markets reported better conditions, though volatility 
remained elevated. Business loan demand decreased 
moderately. Contacts noted that many businesses were 
flush with cash because of the Paycheck Protection 
Program (PPP) but were holding back on new capital 
purchases. Business loan quality deteriorated moderate-
ly, with declines concentrated in leisure and hospitality, 
retail, commercial real estate, and health care. Contacts 
said that payment deferrals and the PPP continued to 
help prevent delinquencies for many clients. Standards 
again tightened modestly. Consumer loan demand in-
creased modestly, led by strong home purchase and 
refinancing activity. Loan quality improved slightly while 
standards tightened slightly. Contacts noted that defer-
rals were limiting delinquencies in the consumer sector 
as well. Contacts continued to report high levels of de-
posits for both businesses and households.  
Agriculture 
The agriculture sector continued to deal with lost income 
due to COVID-19 related factors, though CARES Act 
payments provided some support. In addition, a derecho 
windstorm caused damage to crops (especially corn), 
storage facilities, and livestock facilities in a number of 
areas within the District. Parts of the District were also 
experiencing drought. Still, contacts expected the corn 
and soybean harvests to be near record levels for the 
District as a whole. Corn prices were little changed at 
levels below where they were a year ago, while soybean 
prices rose and were above year-ago levels. Beef and 
pork production was catching up from pandemic-related 
reductions, and the backlog of cattle and hogs ready for 
slaughter fell. One contact reported that a gap in the 
supply of hogs was forming due to earlier euthanizations 
of many baby pigs. Cattle and hog prices rose, but not 
above year-ago prices. Beef and cheese prices moved 
lower as supplies normalized. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from District contacts suggest economic activity has increased modestly, but losses sustained during the pan-
demic have yet to be fully recouped. Activity was also highly variable across sectors. Employment increased modestly 
while wage growth was mixed. Auto dealers reported strong sales, and restaurants reported some improvement. Tour-
ism and hospitality contacts reported that higher COVID-19 cases over the past month have reduced demand. The 
outlook among contacts remains pessimistic but has improved slightly since our previous report. While some contacts 
reported strong demand for their products and services, about half of contacts expect sales to return to pre-crisis levels 
in less than 12 months and one-third of contacts expect it will take more than 12 months. 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has improved modestly since the previ-
ous report. Contacts across many industries reported 
hiring or rehiring workers, though they frequently report-
ed difficulty doing so, citing potential workers’ continuing 
health concerns and childcare obligations. A manufactur-
ing contact reported that it was challenging to hire 
enough workers to staff half the plant’s usual number of 
shifts. An employment agency stated that it was “not 
uncommon” for those it matched to jobs to quit within 48 
hours. Service, hospitality, and healthcare firms contin-
ued to report more mixed employment trends, as did 
smaller firms. Some larger firms also reported laying off 
furloughed workers in the face of slower recovery. 
Wage growth has been mixed, with wages at small firms 
remaining especially stagnant. On net, 15% of contacts 
reported that wages were up since this time last year—
less than half the number who usually report such in-
creases. Some firms reported increasing pay to attract 
scarce workers: One peach farmer reported that a 10% 
pay increase for his packaging workers still left him so 
short-staffed he had to leave some of his crop unhar-
vested. 
Prices  
Prices have increased slightly since the previous report. 
A significant share of contacts reported higher input 
costs; however, many contacts continued to report lower 
prices charged to consumers. Contacts noted increased 
prices for lumber and other building materials. The in-
crease in food costs is causing restaurants to increase 
menu prices. Healthcare contacts noted that the costs of 
personal protective equipment remain elevated. In con-
trast, certain goods experienced price declines since the 
previous report. Contacts noted that prices for gasoline, 
chemicals, crops, and livestock have declined. 
Consumer Spending  
Consumer spending activity has been mixed since our 
previous report. Seasonally adjusted credit and debit 
card spending in early August increased or stayed the 
same compared with average spending in July. General 
retailers and restaurants reported mixed business activi-
ty over the past six weeks. Some retailers reported com-
parable or increased current-quarter sales compared 
with last year, and restaurants indicated that business 
has increased since they have been able to open up 
fractional seating capacity; however, some retailers and 
restaurants expressed concerns about their ability to 
stay open. Most auto dealers reported strong sales, 
some indicating year-over-year increases in current-
quarter sales. Dealers cited that sales continue to be 
bolstered by low interest rates, but their outlook for the 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
coming months is mixed due to an uncertain economic 
outlook. Hospitality contacts reported that business 
activity, which remains significantly below typical levels, 
has declined since early July as reported COVID-19 
cases have increased.  Restaurants that cater to busi-
ness-travel continue to struggle.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has moderately increased since 
our previous report. Multiple steel manufacturing con-
tacts reported that they are now working at full capacity. 
Plastics manufacturers in southern Indiana reported a 
surge in production. Contacts in Louisville reported that 
the automotive production continues to lag, but that most 
automotive plants are in the process of resuming opera-
tions due to the resolution of supply chain problems. 
Survey-based indices indicate that production, new 
orders, and capacity utilization are on average still slight-
ly lower than they were a year ago. On average, con-
tacts expect production, new orders, and capacity utiliza-
tion next quarter to be nearly back to their levels from 
one year ago. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial service sector has improved 
slightly since the previous report. Airport passenger 
traffic has nearly doubled month over month, although 
levels are still down roughly 80% relative to this time last 
year. Cargo traffic has remained stable, increasing mod-
erately month-to-month and year-over-year. A logistics 
firm was able to raise wages and expand its workforce. 
Hospital contacts noted that in-patient and ambulatory 
volumes have reached 90% of pre-crisis levels. Howev-
er, hospitals indicate that they continue to deal with large 
numbers of COVID-19 patients. As a result, research 
remains sidelined and wholly devoted to COVID-19. 
Moreover, fellowship and residency programs are tem-
porarily on hold. Hospital contacts noted that furloughed 
staff have begun to return in phases and hiring for physi-
cians and nurses continues. Dentists and optometrists 
have reported increased activity, as patients who de-
layed care are now seeking treatment. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity increased slightly since 
the previous report. Total home sales have improved 
slightly since early July. Home sales in most of the larg-
est District MSAs are up through early August relative to 
the same period last year. Contacts cited high demand 
for housing and low interest rates as drivers of sales. 
However, a contact in St. Louis noted a recent downturn 
in demand after record-breaking sales in the later 
months of the second quarter.  
Contacts reported a continued shortage of housing on 
the market and homes selling quickly once listed.  
Residential construction increased modestly. Contacts 
noted higher demand for new homes, with a contact in 
Louisville noting that the shortage of housing inventory 
contributed to demand for new home construction. How-
ever, builders reported higher costs and shortages of 
input materials.  
Commercial real estate activity has been mixed since the 
previous report. Contacts reported a lack of demand for 
retail and office real estate due to the pandemic. Con-
tacts noted that existing tenants in retail spaces have 
been struggling due to consumer concerns over safety. 
Some contacts observed higher demand for industrial 
real estate.  
Commercial construction activity has been unchanged. 
Construction activity has generally been sustained for 
projects that were ongoing prior to the pandemic. Con-
tacts reported little to no speculative building for office or 
retail space and that uncertainty surrounding the pan-
demic has disrupted their ability to obtain and plan for 
future projects. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions have slightly worsened since the 
previous report. Overall business loan demand slowed 
after the surge of emergency lending through July. Con-
sumer loan demand has increased, particularly for credit 
cards. Low interest rates continue to spur stronger-than-
expected mortgage lending, refinancing, and new con-
struction loans. Banks reported high levels of deposits 
and increasing loan loss reserves. Overall delinquencies 
have declined primarily in consumer products such as 
credit cards, mortgages, and auto loans. However, bank-
ers continue to express some concern for loans in the 
leisure and entertainment industry. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agriculture conditions have improved slightly from the 
previous reporting period. Relative to early July, the 
percentage of District corn, rice, and soybeans rated fair 
or better has increased slightly while the percentage of 
cotton decreased slightly. Contacts indicated that, while 
crop conditions look promising, low crop prices will re-
duce profitability and there is still concern over trade 
disputes with China and the effects on commodity pric-
ing.  
Natural resource extraction conditions continued to fall 
moderately from June to July, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production decreasing 7%. Production is down 31% 
from a year ago. ■ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity grew slightly since the previous report, but remained well below its prepandemic bench-
mark. Employment was mixed, wage pressures fell moderately, and price pressures generally remained modest. The 
District economy saw growth in consumer spending, tourism, manufacturing, residential construction and real estate, 
and mining. Agriculture was mixed, while services, commercial construction and real estate, and energy declined.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment was mixed since the last report. Job 
postings rose through mid-July in District states, and 
staffing contacts in Minnesota confirmed that job orders 
had been rising. However, there were signs of ebbing job 
demand later in the month and into August. A District-
wide survey in late July by the Minneapolis Fed 
suggested that more firms were cutting staff compared 
with those adding workers. A second survey of 
construction firms found that overall hiring sentiment was 
slightly negative. Contacts in multiple District states said 
that new job postings and hires have been skewed 
toward those that directly produce income—sales, 
manufacturing, construction—while administrative and 
support positions have pulled back as firms try to remain 
as lean as possible. Despite high unemployment, staffing 
and other contacts nonetheless reported that unfilled job 
orders have been rising. Firms looking for workers 
reported difficulty in finding labor, particularly in sectors 
like food and entertainment that were operating at 
reduced capacity and faced the prospect of future 
shutdowns. Initial unemployment claims across District 
states in early August were modestly lower than a month 
earlier, but still significantly above normal. In general, 
many firms expressed concern about future demand and 
its impact on staffing. A large professional services firm 
in Minneapolis-St. Paul said, “I anticipate furloughs 
becoming layoffs if some of our shelved work doesn't 
start up.” 
Wage pressures continued to fall moderately overall 
since the last report. The Districtwide survey of general 
businesses found that most employers were holding 
steady on wages, but more reported wage decreases 
(30 percent) than those reporting increases (10 percent). 
A small share of local governments has also reported 
wage and other compensation cuts in the face of budget 
shortfalls. However, wage increases were seen in certain 
sectors. Staffing contacts reported slightly rising wages, 
driven by manufacturing clients who were still seeing 
good business. The Minneapolis Fed survey of 
construction firms also found that one-quarter had raised 
wages since the pandemic’s onset, while 10 percent had 
cut wages.     
Prices  
Price pressures remained modest, with some 
exceptions. Nearly half of early respondents to a survey 
of Ninth District professional services firms said input 
prices increased over a year earlier; however, a majority 
expected prices to remain flat over the coming 12 
months. Structural lumber prices spiked since the last 
report, as inventories dwindled in the face of strong 
demand. Retail fuel prices in District states were little 
changed over the reporting period. Prices received by 
farmers in June increased from a year earlier for 
soybeans, potatoes, dry beans, and turkeys, while prices 
for corn, wheat, hay, cattle, hogs, chickens, and eggs 
decreased; milk prices were unchanged.  
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was modestly higher since the last 
report, but remained below prepandemic levels. Vehicles 
sales were up. A dealership in the western portion of the 
District reported strong year-over-year sales in July 
across multiple locations. Motor vehicle sales tax 
collections in Minnesota were also higher over this 
period. Passenger traffic at the eight largest airports in 
the District continued to increase modestly through early 
August. However, total traffic remains at just 35 percent 
of normal seasonal levels.  
Certain segments of tourism reported healthy activity. 
Businesses catering to summer outdoor leisure reported 
robust demand compared with earlier in the summer. 
Sales of equipment and other products catering to this 
market—recreational vehicles, bikes, ATVs, boats, 
kayaks—were reportedly strong, but held back by low 
inventories. But many retail shops, restaurants, and bars 
continued to report only moderate demand even in the 
face of restrained operating capacity. Hotel and 
convention business remained dour with most large 
business and social gatherings canceled. One notable 
outlier was the annual motorcycle rally in Sturgis, S.D. 
Attendance was down modestly from previous years, but 
offered a spike in regional consumer demand.  
Services 
Activity in the services sector decreased since the last 
report. Preliminary results of a survey of District 
professional services firms indicated that sales and 
profits decreased for a majority of respondents 
compared with a year earlier, and employment and 
productivity fell slightly. Firms’ expectations for the 
coming 12 months were more optimistic. Contacts in the 
advertising and marketing fields continued to report 
weakened demand as clients looked to cut budgets. 
Demand for heavy equipment maintenance and repair 
services was strong, according to several contacts.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was moderately lower since the 
last report. A Districtwide survey of more than 600 
construction firms found significant cancellations and 
delays for both private and public projects. Firms 
reported staying relatively busy by pulling future work 
forward, but were also dealing with material shortages, 
supply chain problems, and labor difficulties. There was 
growing concern about new projects to bid on for the fall 
and early next year. Residential construction was 
modestly higher. While home building contractors 
reported project cancellations and delays, there were 
also more frequent reports of increased activity. July 
residential permitting activity saw year-over-year growth 
in Minneapolis-St. Paul and St. Cloud (Minn.), Bismarck 
and Fargo (N.D.), and Sioux Falls, S.D. But flat or lower 
activity was reported in other regions. 
Commercial real estate slowed modestly. In Minneapolis
-St. Paul, vacancy rates in most segments have risen 
modestly. Industrial space was called a “bright spot” by 
one source. New, speculative construction has slowed, 
but client-driven demand continued, particularly for new 
manufacturing and distribution space. Leasing and sales 
for office space has slowed, and several sources noted 
some demand flight to the suburbs from downtown. New 
senior housing projects were reportedly struggling to find 
tenants. Residential real estate was moderately higher. 
Most markets saw home sales rise in July—many by 
double digits—over a year earlier, with the notable 
exception of Minneapolis-St. Paul, where sales were flat.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased slightly since the 
last report, though it remained below prepandemic 
levels. An index of manufacturing activity indicated 
expansion in Minnesota and South Dakota in July 
compared with a month earlier, but decreased activity in 
North Dakota. A producer of construction equipment 
reported that while demand from the commercial sector 
was down, it was offset by an increase in demand from 
residential building. Food processors reported a similar 
divergence between commercial and home demand. 
Contacts reported that while they’ve remained busy with 
backlogs through the pandemic, the pace of new orders 
had declined, leading to concerns about conditions later 
in the year and into 2021.  
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were mixed. Lenders 
responding to the Minneapolis Fed’s second-quarter 
(July) survey of agricultural credit conditions 
overwhelmingly reported decreased farm incomes in 
their area relative to a year earlier, with a similar share 
reporting decreased capital spending. Crops as of early 
August were in strong condition in most areas of the 
District, with some states on track for record or near-
record production, but prices for most commodities 
remained low. Activity in the energy sector decreased 
further, while mining rebounded. District oil and gas 
exploration held steady at subdued levels. The number 
of drilling rigs in the District as of mid-August was 
unchanged from a month earlier. Meanwhile, recent 
North Dakota oil production fell well below its recent 
peak. Most District iron ore operations that were closed 
during the early stages of the pandemic have reopened.  
■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity continued to strengthen in July and August. Overall, the economy expanded moderately, 
but activity in many sectors still remained below pre-pandemic levels. Consumer spending increased moderately as all 
subsectors reported improvement. In the months ahead, retail and auto contacts expected growth to continue, while 
tourism and restaurant contacts were more pessimistic. Manufacturing activity picked up, with both non-durable and 
durable goods producers reporting higher levels of production and new orders. Durable goods activity remained well 
below year-ago levels, but additional gains were expected in the next few months. Sales also picked up in the transporta-
tion, wholesale trade, and professional and high-tech sectors, and moderate growth was anticipated in coming months. 
Residential real estate activity continued to increase at a moderate pace, but commercial real estate conditions worsened 
further. Energy activity held relatively steady, but rig counts remained well below year-ago levels. The agriculture sector 
remained weak, and the deterioration in farm income accelerated. District employment rebounded further in July and 
August, but was still moderately below year-ago levels. Wages rose slightly, while overall input and selling prices in-
creased at a modest pace.            
Employment and Wages  
District employment increased modestly since the last 
survey period but remained moderately below year-ago 
levels. The biggest gains were in real estate, transporta-
tion and tourism sectors, but despite these gains, tour-
ism and transportation employment was still well below a 
year ago. Manufacturing, wholesale trade, and profes-
sional and high-tech employment rose modestly for the 
first time since declining this spring. Overall employment 
expectations improved in August, with manufacturers 
expecting moderate gains and services contacts expect-
ing slight gains in the months ahead.   
Respondents were split regarding labor shortages, with 
many reporting a need for truck drivers, mechanics, and 
restaurant workers. Wages rose slightly, and modest 
gains were expected in the coming months.                 
Prices  
Input and selling prices rose modestly in July and August 
and were expected to continue to do so in the next few 
months. Prices for raw materials and finished products in 
the manufacturing sector increased modestly, and ex-
pectations were for similar gains in the coming months. 
Transportation input prices rose moderately and selling 
prices increased slightly, but were still modestly below 
year-ago levels. Construction supply respondents noted 
a moderate increase in selling prices since the last sur-
vey and expected prices to continue to increase in the 
months ahead. Retail input prices increased moderately, 
while selling prices rose at a slightly slower pace. Res-
taurant input and selling prices continued to increase 
significantly, but the pace of increases moderated com-
pared to the previous survey. Restaurant prices were 
above year-ago levels and were expected to continue to 
rise in the coming months.                
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased moderately since the last 
survey period but remained modestly below year-ago 
levels. Sales rose for auto, retail, restaurant, and tour-
ism, with retail sales moderately above a year ago, driv-
en by strong grocery and home improvement sales over 
the past few months. While restaurant and tourism activi-
ty showed a moderate rise compared to the last survey, 
activity was still strongly below year-ago levels. More 
than half of retail, restaurant, auto, and tourism contacts 
reported that stimulus funds had a major positive effect 
on their businesses in recent months. Expectations were 
mixed. Contacts in the health services, retail, and auto 
sectors predicted moderate gains in the months ahead, 
while restaurant and tourism contacts anticipated de-
clines.           
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded for the second consec-
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
utive survey period, and strengthened in August to a 
moderate pace of growth. Gains in the non-durable 
goods sector outpaced those in the durables goods 
sector, but contacts in both sectors noted positive 
growth. Production and new orders increased robustly in 
the non-durable goods sector, leading to overall activity 
levels that were slightly above a year ago. Production 
and new orders rose modestly in the durable goods 
sector, but activity remained moderately down from year-
ago levels. Many respondents indicated that if govern-
ment support were to diminish in the next six months, 
more furloughs or layoffs would be needed. Expectations 
rose moderately regarding production and new orders, 
but capital expenditures were expected to remain rough-
ly flat.    
Outside of manufacturing, sales in the transportation and 
wholesale sectors increased moderately compared to 
the last survey. Sales in professional and high-tech 
services showed modest improvement but remained 
moderately below year-ago levels. Contacts in wholesale 
trade, transportation, and professional and high-tech 
services sectors expected moderate increases in sales 
in the coming months. Expectations for capital expendi-
tures were mixed across sectors.   
Real Estate and Construction  
Residential real estate conditions picked up moderately 
in July and August, while commercial real estate showed 
continued declines. Residential real estate experienced 
moderate increases in home sales and prices, with all 
respondents reporting stronger activity than a year ago. 
Construction supply sales continued to increase slightly, 
and expectations for future sales rose for the first time 
following declines in the spring. Home inventories de-
creased moderately and remained low, but contacts 
expected residential real estate activity to expand further 
in the coming months. Commercial real estate conditions 
continued to worsen as absorption rates, prices, rents, 
and sales fell since the previous survey period and re-
mained moderately below year-ago levels. Commercial 
construction declined modestly, and contacts indicated 
that the slowdown in commercial construction may be 
accelerating. Additionally, access to credit remained 
difficult, and more respondents indicated higher vacancy 
rates. Commercial real estate contacts anticipated condi-
tions to worsen in the next few months.    
Banking 
Since the last survey, bankers reported a slight increase 
in overall loan demand. Increases were concentrated in 
two categories, with strong increases in residential real 
estate loan demand and slight increases in consumer 
installment loan demand. Respondents indicated loan 
demand for commercial real estate held steady, while 
demand for agricultural loans declined modestly and 
commercial and industrial loans fell moderately. Credit 
standards tightened in all categories, with a modest 
tightening in commercial real estate and commercial and 
industrial loans and slight tightening in residential real 
estate, consumer installment, and agricultural loans. In 
comparison to a year ago, loan quality decreased some-
what, and bankers expected loan quality to continue 
decreasing over the next six months. Deposit levels rose 
at a moderate pace since the last survey.                
Energy 
District energy activity held relatively steady since the 
previous survey period, but was much lower than levels 
of activity in August 2019. Revenues and employment 
continued to decline, but the number of active oil and 
gas rigs in the District was mostly unchanged. Rig levels 
remained significantly below year-ago levels. Firms shut-
in wells earlier this year, and indicated no immediate 
plans to bring more production capacity back online until 
the oversupply of oil and gas wanes and prices increase. 
Despite most regional energy firms taking advantage of 
the SBA PPP loan program, expectations for future 
drilling and business activity remained subdued. Contin-
ued uncertainty was a key factor inhibiting future capital 
expenditures.                 
Agriculture 
Weak conditions in the Tenth District agricultural econo-
my persisted, and farm income deteriorated further. The 
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic continued to con-
strain prices of key agricultural commodities, and profit 
opportunities remained limited. Prices for major crops 
and livestock increased slightly from the prior reporting 
period, but remained below pre-pandemic levels. 
Drought in the western portion of the District could fur-
ther reduce revenues for some producers. Dry conditions 
were most prevalent in Colorado, where nearly 30 per-
cent of corn acres had poor or very poor quality through 
mid-August. Alongside lower revenues, farm income 
across all states in the District declined at a noticeably 
faster pace than the prior survey period.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Increasing COVID-19 infections in the Eleventh District have disrupted the budding economic recovery in some sectors 
and is the biggest risk to the near-term outlook. While manufacturing activity continued to expand and loan volumes 
increased in the financial sector, service sector activity declined overall in July but resumed its nascent recovery in 
August. Retail sales fell steeply in July but stabilized somewhat in August. Energy activity remained depressed. Activity 
in the housing market was a bright spot, with home sales rising sharply. Employment remained fairly stable, according 
to contacts. Input costs rose modestly while selling prices were flat to down. Outlooks were increasingly uncertain, with 
numerous contacts expressing concern over surging COVID-19 cases and the resulting disruption to business. 
Employment and Wages  
Most contacts reported steady employment, though 
there were some reports of either layoffs or increased 
headcounts. Employment declines were centered in the 
energy industry and parts of the service sector. Manufac-
turing jobs recovered somewhat as more firms noted net 
hiring than noted net layoffs for the first time since Janu-
ary. Jobs grew in health care and professional and busi-
ness services, while contacts more often noted employ-
ment declines in retail, leisure and hospitality, and trans-
portation services. Energy contacts said more layoffs are 
coming, but that the worst is likely past.  
Wage growth accelerated slightly in August; however, 
airlines and energy firms among others noted pay freez-
es and/or cuts.  
Prices 
Input costs rose at a moderate pace, except in oilfield 
services where costs were down 10-20 percent versus 
early-2020 contracts. Fuel costs have crept up and 
lumber prices have doubled since earlier in the year. 
Selling prices were largely flat. 
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing activity continued to recover, expanding 
moderately in July and August. Growth was led by high 
tech and construction materials manufacturing, while 
food manufactures noted a deceleration from previous 
months. Refiners noted that consumption of motor fuels 
had improved, but profit margins remained depressed. 
Manufacturing was still below normal levels, according to 
nearly three-fourths of contacts. They reported that July 
revenues were off by more than 30 percent from a typi-
cal July, on average. 
Outlooks remained positive, and most manufacturers 
expect increased demand and production six months 
from now.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales fell steeply in July but stabilized somewhat 
in August. Wholesalers also noted declines, though not 
as pronounced. Auto dealers said sales were con-
strained by short inventories due to factory shutdowns or 
bottlenecks. One contact noted that they were not ex-
pecting normal new-vehicle inventory until September or 
October. 
Just over three-quarters of retailers said July revenues 
were below normal, by about 22 percent on average. 
More than half of retailers said supply chain disruptions 
were restraining revenues, in addition to weak demand. 
Expectations for future activity declined substantially, 
and uncertainty rose sharply. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Nonfinancial Services 
Service sector activity declined overall in July after a 
short-lived expansion in June, but modest growth re-
sumed in August. Face-to-face contact industries, such 
as leisure and hospitality, suffered as new COVID-19 
cases rose sharply in Texas in July. However, while 
hotels have been hit hard, the single-family vacation 
rental market has been very strong. Airlines continued to 
struggle, with demand down 75 percent from a year ago 
according to multiple contacts, who also noted that busi-
ness travel is virtually nonexistent. Colleges and univer-
sities across the district face logistical and financial 
challenges as they shift their fall semesters to a partially 
virtual environment with limited on-site learning and 
experience reduced enrollment. Some industries, like 
professional services, were less affected by COVID-19 
trends and saw increased revenues in both July and 
August. Staffing contacts noted demand was stable 
recently but down year over year. 
Roughly three-quarters of contacts said July revenues 
were below normal, by just over 30 percent on average. 
This magnitude of the shortfall was higher for leisure and 
hospitality firms, who said July revenues were off 46 
percent, on average. 
Outlooks worsened in July but improved in August, 
though uncertainty continued to climb, particularly re-
garding COVID-19 and the presidential election. When 
asked how likely it is that their business will permanently 
shut down within the next 12 months, 90 percent of 
contacts said it is not likely. Among leisure and hospitali-
ty firms, though, more than a quarter say it is at least 
somewhat likely their business will not survive to next 
July. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market was a bright spot. Existing-
home sales climbed sharply in July and remained solid in 
early August. Home builders continued to note wide-
spread strength in sales. Contacts said record-low mort-
gage rates were driving sales, and inventories remained 
very tight for both resale and new homes. Builders noted 
strong sales have enabled them to raise prices. New 
development was active, and outlooks were optimistic.  
Apartment leasing improved further in July, but rents 
were flat to down compared to year-ago levels and con-
cessions have increased, particularly in areas where 
there is a lot of new product. Office leasing activity was 
modest and sublease space has increased. Industrial 
demand remained solid.  
Financial Services 
Loan volume increased over the past six weeks, driven 
by a sharp rise in residential real estate lending. Com-
mercial real estate lending stabilized after falling over the 
prior three periods, while commercial and industrial and 
consumer loan volumes continued to decline. Loan 
pricing fell further, and credit standards and terms con-
tinued to tighten. Another significant increase was seen 
in loan nonperformance, and nearly three-quarters of 
bankers expect further increases in loan defaults. Con-
tacts report that 11 percent of loan volumes are currently 
on payment deferral due to COVID-19, on average, 
down slightly from the prior period. Requests for loan 
modifications were most prevalent among businesses in 
accommodation and food services as well as real estate 
and rental and leasing.  
Outlooks were more pessimistic, with expectations for 
future loan demand turning slightly negative. Also, bank-
ers voiced concern over the uncertainty about the PPP 
forgiveness process and that it could become arduous. 
Energy 
The Eleventh District rig count continued to erode over 
the reporting period, though well completion activity 
ticked up. Contacts continued to express a grim outlook. 
The recent increase in COVID-19 trends in parts of the 
U.S. and elsewhere is putting downward pressure on 
expectations for oil prices and fuel consumption. Con-
tacts said it is unlikely that oil prices will reach above $50 
per barrel anytime soon, which is roughly the average 
price at which Eleventh District firms need to profitably 
drill new wells. 
Agriculture 
Soil moisture conditions deteriorated across the western 
part of the district, where drought conditions intensified. 
Grain harvesting progressed and yields were fairly nor-
mal, though prices remained unprofitably low. Cotton 
prices inched higher over the past six weeks as demand 
exceeded expectations, though prices were still below 
break-even levels without government price supports. 
Cattle and dairy prices trended higher. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded slightly on balance during the reporting period of July through mid-
August. Employment levels increased marginally, but hiring was curtailed by firms’ cost-containing efforts. Wages were 
generally stable, as was price inflation. Sales of retail goods rose slightly, while conditions in the consumer and busi-
ness services sectors remained precarious. Manufacturing activity increased modestly. Weak conditions persisted in the 
agriculture sector. Residential real estate activity increased at a brisk pace, while activity in the commercial market 
picked up a bit. Lending activity ticked up further. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment levels increased marginally on net, but 
many employers curtailed hiring efforts to control costs in 
the challenging economic environment. Some metal and 
wood manufacturing facilities returned to operating full-
time and added workers due to increased demand. A 
large transportation and logistics services provider in-
creased entry-level job recruiting but froze manager 
searches. Most health-care and financial services provid-
ers noted restrictions on new hiring and overall flat em-
ployment levels, though a payment-processing firm in 
the Pacific Northwest reported actively hiring for several 
positions. Restaurants increased staffing modestly over 
the reporting period, but the tourism and entertainment 
industries noted persistently low employment levels. 
Some manufacturers expressed difficulties in finding 
skilled labor. Contacts in the agriculture sector also 
noted dwindling availability of immigrant workers, reduc-
ing the supply of unskilled labor. A few employers report-
ed increased use of flexible schedules, or in some cases 
absenteeism, due to concerns about COVID-19 expo-
sure, childcare, or schooling alternatives. 
Wages remained flat overall. Most employers reported 
unchanged wages over the reporting period, partially due 
to cost containment efforts and uncertainty. In California 
and Oregon, wages at the bottom of the distribution saw 
a slight increase due to the implementation of new mini-
mum wage regulations in July. Building materials manu-
facturers in California and the Pacific Northwest reported 
reinstating cost-of-living wage adjustments, retracting 
previous wage cuts, or offering widespread wage in-
creases due to a brisk increase in demand. Conversely, 
some retailers eliminated hazard pay bonuses for their 
employees. 
Prices  
Inflation remained stable over the reporting period, on 
balance. Increased demand for logistics and transporta-
tion services resulted in additional surcharges designed 
to offset the cost of volume increases and greater disper-
sion of routes. Similarly, prices for metal products and 
building supplies strengthened on the back of recent 
additional demand. Food prices continued to climb at 
grocery stores, but prices declined slightly at restaurants 
and retail stores in an attempt to spur business. Some 
financial and business services providers either reduced 
or eliminated some types of fees because of lower de-
mand. Contacts in other sectors such as health care, 
utilities, and machine supplies and repairs reported little 
to no changes in prices.    
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales rose slightly over the past six weeks, follow-
ing a large bump in May and June when restrictions on 
nonessential businesses initially eased. Foot traffic to 
brick-and-mortar establishments decreased only slightly 
from end-June levels, while growth in e-commerce re-
mained robust. Demand for do-it-yourself home materi-
als soared, and sales of some specialty goods, for exam-
ple bicycles and pet products, were on par with those 
from a year ago. Auto dealers reported continued high 
demand and lean inventories for both new and used 
vehicles, especially light trucks and SUVs. Retailers in 
some other sectors, such as apparel, mentioned reduced 
sales, operating hours, and capacity utilization, attrib-
uting the cutbacks to increases in COVID-19 cases and 
adherence to social-distancing guidelines.  
Conditions in the consumer and business services sec-
tors remained precarious. Sales remained strong in 
The Beige Book ■ August 2020 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
select markets, including logistics and delivery services, 
meeting technologies, and tax preparations. However, the 
bulk of food service, travel, and hospitality providers 
continued to operate at a fraction of their capacities and 
saw the bump in sales in late spring reversed during the 
current reporting period. Restaurants that have been able 
to continue operations reported weak sales, reduced 
seating, and dire prospects for the immediate future. 
Some have adapted by exclusively offering take-out 
service and operating straight from their kitchens. Air 
travel remained subdued with one airport in Southern 
California welcoming only 9 percent of its typical pre-
pandemic monthly level for domestic passengers and 
virtually no international arrivals. Hoteliers in Southern 
California, Washington, and Hawaii reported lower book-
ing volumes and occupancy rates, though those in South-
ern California performed somewhat better compared with 
the rest of the District. Demand for nonurgent legal ser-
vices, elective health procedures, and live event-based 
entertainment remained soft, as clients socially distanced 
and postponed discretionary expenditures.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity increased modestly over the re-
porting period, but remains considerably below pre-
pandemic levels. Demand for recycled metals and fin-
ished steel products strengthened as auto production and 
construction continued to pick up, though capacity utiliza-
tion rates remained at about three-quarters of their year-
ago levels. Building materials manufacturers have also 
benefited from increased construction activity, with a 
wood product manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest 
reporting many sawmills returning to normal working 
hours or even overtime. Energy usage by manufacturers 
across the District also rebounded, while a renewable 
energy equipment producer in California mentioned pent-
up demand for its domestic output. Some manufacturers 
reported more challenging conditions depending on in-
dustry, raw material availability, and severity of supply 
chain disruptions.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector remained weak over-
all. Yields and quality of grain, fruit, and nut crops were 
high. In the Mountain West, bumper wheat crops contrib-
uted to already bulging inventories from previous har-
vests. General production and distribution were con-
strained by COVID-19-related supply chain disruptions 
and additional expenses incurred to adhere to social-
distancing guidelines at farms and processing centers. 
Domestic demand remained mixed overall, but sales of 
grapes, apples, and cherries to grocery stores and lum-
ber to retailers and contractors increased notably over 
the reporting period. Export demand was weak, with 
producers in California and the Pacific Northwest high-
lighting poor sales to Asian markets across a variety of 
products, including nuts and lumber.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential construction activity increased at a brisk 
pace, supported by the low interest rate environment. 
Contacts reported increased demand for new single and 
multifamily homes in most areas, which helped boost 
permit issuance across the District. Existing inventories 
remained low, and prices climbed further as many buy-
ers placed competing bids on desired homes. Workers 
continued to seek opportunities to move away from 
major metropolitan areas as some jobs become more 
conducive to teleworking. In the Mountain West and 
Pacific Northwest, homebuilders reported having trouble 
keeping up with demand, and pointed to the increasing 
costs of building materials and supply chain disruptions 
as their main constraints. Some parts of California saw 
less building activity and delayed permit issuance, as 
many local government offices remained closed. 
Activity in the commercial real estate market picked up 
slightly, on net. Demand for new office space and hotel 
rooms remained soft, diverting construction into other 
commercial sectors. Existing commercial projects re-
sumed, and new demand for industrial and warehouse 
space kept permitting high relative to pandemic-induced 
lows. A contact in Utah reported large investments in 
commercial properties including an airport, a convention 
venue, and an office tower.  
Financial Institutions  
Overall lending activity ticked up further. Contacts noted 
a shift in loan demand toward home mortgages, auto 
loans, and standard commercial loans as PPP activity 
wound down. Bankers reported that new and refinanced 
mortgages drove the bulk of business over the reporting 
period, as households took advantage of low interest 
rates. Loans to agricultural businesses were weak, but 
demand from builders was robust. Bankers highlighted 
solid liquidity conditions and strong capital positions as 
well as double-digit increases for deposits in some are-
as. Some contacts noted a decline in lending standards, 
which reduced credit quality and could increase delin-
quencies in the coming months. A contact in Arizona 
reported limited service hours due to COVID-19-related 
precautions, delaying deliveries of financial services. ■ 


