The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
October 18, 2017 
October 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
based on information collected on or before October 6, 2017. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Reports from all 12 Federal Reserve Districts indicated that economic activity increased in September through early 
October, with the pace of growth split between modest and moderate. The Richmond, Atlanta, and Dallas Districts 
reported major disruptions from Hurricanes Harvey and Irma in some areas and sectors, including transportation, ener-
gy, and agriculture. Manufacturing activity and nonfinancial services expanded modestly to moderately in most Dis-
tricts. Retail spending rose slowly, while vehicle sales and tourism increased in most Districts. Residential construction 
continued to increase, and growth in commercial construction was up slightly on balance. Low home inventory levels 
continued to constrain residential sales in many areas, while nonresidential real estate activity increased slightly over-
all. Loan demand was generally stable to modestly higher. Growth in the energy sector eased slightly. Agricultural 
conditions were mixed; while some regions were reporting better-than-expected harvests, low commodity prices contin-
ued to weigh down farm incomes. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment growth was modest on balance, with most Districts reporting flat to moderate increases. Labor markets 
were widely described as tight. Many Districts noted that employers were having difficulty finding qualified workers, 
particularly in construction, transportation, skilled manufacturing, and some health care and service positions. These 
shortages were also restraining business growth. Firms in several Districts reported that scarcity of labor, particularly 
related to construction, would be exacerbated by hurricane recovery efforts. Despite widespread labor tightness, the 
majority of Districts reported only modest to moderate wage pressures. However, some Districts reported stronger 
wage pressures in certain sectors, including transportation and construction. Growing use of sign-on bonuses, over-
time, and other nonwage efforts to attract and retain workers were also reported.  
Prices 
Price pressures remained modest since the previous report. Several Districts noted increased manufacturing input 
costs, but in most cases these weren’t passed through to selling prices. Retail prices generally increased slightly. 
Transportation, energy, and construction materials prices increased more rapidly, with some Districts citing effects from 
hurricanes.  
Boston 
Economic activity expanded at a modest to moderate 
pace since August, according to contacts. Respondents 
in manufacturing, retailing, and software and IT services 
said revenues continued to increase year over year. 
Commercial and residential real estate market conditions 
were mostly unchanged. Looking forward, business 
contacts remained upbeat about the outlook.  
New York 
The District’s economy has continued to expand at a 
moderate pace since the last report, while labor markets 
have been tight. Input prices continued to rise moderate-
ly, while selling prices rose more modestly. Housing 
markets have strengthened somewhat, on balance, but 
commercial real estate markets have been flat.  
 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall, economic activity continued at a modest pace of 
growth. Most sectors, including manufacturing and nonfi-
nancial services, continued to grow modestly. Non-auto 
retail sales showed slight improvement, and auto sales 
grew modestly after declining in the previous period. On 
balance, employment changed little, while wages and 
prices continued to grow modestly.  
Cleveland 
Business activity increased from that of the previous 
reporting period, but the overall pace of growth was 
moderate. After slowing during the summer months, 
hiring picked up across industries. Input price pressures 
outpaced selling price pressures. Retail store spending 
was flat; auto sales rose. Nonresidential construction 
remains healthy, but there are signs the industry may be 
slowing.  
Richmond 
The economy expanded moderately. Manufacturing and 
port activity picked up, retail sales rose, and tourism 
remained strong. Commercial real estate leasing and 
lending activity increased modestly. Labor markets 
strengthened and wage pressures broadened. Prices 
rose moderately, partially due to supply chain disruptions 
from the hurricanes.  
Atlanta 
Economic conditions improved modestly since the last 
report. Tightness in the labor market continued with few 
reports of wage pressures. Input cost pressures were 
subdued. Non-auto retailers cited steady sales growth. 
Tourism, energy, and agriculture were impacted by 
Hurricane Irma. Home sales and prices increased. New 
orders and production rose. Credit was available to most 
borrowers.  
Chicago 
Growth continued at a modest rate. Employment, busi-
ness spending, and manufacturing increased modestly, 
while consumer spending increased slightly. Construc-
tion and real estate activity was little changed, as were 
financial sector conditions. Wages and prices rose mod-
estly. Contacts expected the District’s corn and soybean 
harvests to be close to trend.  
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have continued to improve at a 
modest pace since our previous report. The District 
continues to see relatively stronger growth in both manu-
facturing and banking sectors, although growth in both 
sectors has decelerated somewhat since the beginning 
of the year.  
Minneapolis 
Economic activity grew modestly. Despite employer 
demand, job growth suffered from a lack of available 
workers. Tourism saw growth, but consumer spending 
overall showed some signs of weakness. Home con-
struction rose, while home sales fell due to tight invento-
ries. Commercial construction continued to lag. Manufac-
turing and mining activity picked up.  
Kansas City 
Economic activity in the Tenth District continued to ex-
pand modestly, and expectations for future growth were 
positive in most sectors. Retail sales increased modest-
ly, the manufacturing sector expanded moderately, and 
transportation and wholesale trade firms noted strong 
sales. However, growth in the energy sector eased, and 
the agricultural sector continued to soften.  
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately. The impact from 
Hurricane Harvey varied by location and industry, and 
most contacts do not expect significant long-term disrup-
tion. The manufacturing sector exhibited notable strength 
with stronger output, increased hiring, and a pickup in 
price inflation. Auto sales surged in response to the loss 
of storm-damaged vehicles, and labor market shortages 
persisted and may become more acute as hurricane 
recovery continues.  
San Francisco 
Economic activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace. Overall price inflation was flat and remained low, 
while upward wage pressures strengthened somewhat 
and conditions in the labor market tightened further. 
Sales of retail goods picked up, and growth in the con-
sumer and business services sectors remained strong. 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector improved. Activity 
in the residential real estate market was strong.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Most business contacts in the First District reported modest to moderate year-over-year revenue increases in recent 
weeks. Both retailers and manufacturers cited sales and revenue improvements and most software and information 
technology services firms reported strong results. Commercial real estate conditions in the region were reported to be 
unchanged from the last report, with office leasing activity steady, albeit at different paces in individual markets. Resi-
dential real estate contacts also cited little change, with low inventories and rising home and condo prices. Most firms 
said they were doing only modest net hiring, although some raised wages. Manufacturing firms mentioned price increas-
es somewhat more often than in the recent past. Firms in the District retained a positive outlook. 
Employment and Wages  
Most First District business contacts reported little 
change in regional labor markets. Some retailers report-
ed that they have raised their wage offers somewhat in 
order to attract new hires. All manufacturing contacts 
said that employment grew in line with expectations; in 
most cases, that meant that employment did not grow by 
much. A tech contact selling online backup solutions was 
aggressively hiring. Other software and IT services 
contacts were hiring in the low single-digit percentages; 
all noted the labor market for technical positions re-
mained tight globally, and particularly in New England. 
Prices 
Contacts reported some price increases this round. 
Retailers indicated that prices for goods remained 
steady, though one contact in the hardware industry said 
that paint prices had recently gone up 5 percent. Several 
manufacturing contacts reported price increases. A 
packaging firm recently raised prices 10 percent; they 
also reported an 8 percent to 10 percent increase in 
material costs over the year, although they said that 
materials prices remained well below levels from a few 
years ago. A chemical manufacturer said customers 
accepted a price increase more easily than expected. A 
manufacturer of frozen fish said it had reduced dis-
counts.  
 
Retail and Tourism 
All responding retailers reported that sales improved 
over the last six weeks. Whereas previous reports some-
times cited flat or negative year-over-year results, con-
tacts this round reported year-over-year comparable-
store gains in the 2 percent to 4 percent range. Consum-
ers reportedly spent on clothing, furniture, and home 
improvement items. Contacts were generally optimistic 
that the recent positive sales trend would continue 
through the end of the year. 
The most recent year-over-year results for the tourist 
industry run through August: compared to 2016, interna-
tional air travel to Boston increased 11 percent; in total, 
domestic and international air travel to Boston rose 6.2 
percent. Hotel occupancy rates for August were 1 per-
cent higher in the Boston area than a year earlier, while 
the average monthly room rate was up almost 3 percent 
year-over-year. This strong performance alleviated some 
previous concern that a slower trend in tourism during 
the first half of the year would continue into the high 
summer-fall travel season. A tourism contact noted that 
hotels are facing increasing competition from alternative 
lodging sources, which may partly account for a slight 
drop in 2017 year-to-date occupancy rates. However, 
this contact hypothesized that the options offered by non
-traditional lodging services may appeal to leisure  
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
travelers who are more sensitive to price, and that a 
traditionally expensive destination like Boston could see 
an overall increase in tourism as a result.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Based on an unusually low number of respondents this 
round, 60 percent of manufacturing firms reported higher 
sales in line with expectations. One contact reported a 
decline driven mostly by disruptions in its chemical busi-
ness due to the hurricanes; specifically, a plant deliver-
ing a key input was destroyed by Hurricane Harvey and 
the firm temporarily shifted its sourcing to costlier South 
American sources. A toy manufacturer also reported 
some hurricane-related problems related to plastic sup-
ply. Neither firm expected any long-term effects from the 
Hurricane. A company that produces packaging used by 
Internet retailers reported strong sales growth although 
lower than in comparable periods in recent years. None 
of our contacts reported any revisions to their capital 
expenditure plans. 
All responding firms reported a positive outlook with only 
small revisions from previous rounds. A toy manufactur-
ing contact said they were less optimistic than when they 
last spoke to us, but still optimistic. 
Software and Information Technology Services 
Software and IT services respondents serving the 
healthcare and health devices industries continued to 
thrive in New England. A healthcare IT firm converted 
strong demand for new browser-based offerings into 17 
percent revenue growth year-over-year. Firms providing 
IT for manufacturing and online backup experienced low- 
to mid-teen revenue growth year-over-year. Demand 
from manufacturing and business customers continued 
to firm in this quarter. An enterprise software contact 
continued to struggle, with revenues down 5 percent 
year-over-year; however, the contact maintained that 
their market was healthy and demand was steady – their 
struggles were largely internal.  
All contacts were optimistic about the future. The only 
potentially negative factor was uncertainty surrounding 
the health care landscape in Washington.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate contacts in the First District 
reported that conditions were mostly unchanged since 
late August. Office leasing activity was steady across the 
District, but still at a very slow pace in Hartford and Port-
land and at a decent pace in Providence and Boston. 
Medical office leasing and related construction gained 
momentum in Maine. Demand for industrial space re-
mained strong throughout the District, resulting in in-
creases in sales prices and rental rates compared with 
last year and a modest amount of new construction 
activity. Investment sales activity in Greater Boston 
softened a bit amid a modest decline in foreign capital 
flows, but prices for premier commercial properties in the 
area reportedly held steady. Also in Greater Boston, 
apartment construction slowed amid a perceived over-
supply of luxury units. Modest increases in loan defaults 
were reported for retail centers in Maine and for obsolete 
office buildings in Connecticut.  
Contacts expected that commercial real estate activity 
would at least hold steady moving forward. Some noted 
downside risks related to potential further increases in 
interest rates and to proposed federal tax changes.  
Residential Real Estate 
Heading into the fall, residential real estate markets in 
the First District faced continuous upward pressure on 
prices. (All six states and the Greater Boston area re-
ported changes from August 2016 to August 2017.) For 
single family homes, five out of the seven reporting 
areas reported increases in closed sales, while Massa-
chusetts and Boston experienced moderate decreases. 
For condos, closed sales were up in New Hampshire 
and Rhode Island; other reporting areas experienced no 
change or decreases. Rising median sales prices were 
reported throughout the First District. According to a 
contact in Rhode Island, “Prices have been consistently 
on the rise, hitting levels that we haven’t seen since 
2007.” 
Most areas are still struggling with inventory shortages. 
Except for Connecticut, all areas reported decreases in 
inventory for both single family homes and condos. 
Contacts expressed different outlooks on inventory, with 
those in Massachusetts concerned that shortages were 
likely to continue.  
Looking forward, contacts maintained a positive outlook 
for substantial demand and stable economic indicators. 
Respondents said they expected especially strong de-
mand for fully renovated houses and for homes on the 
lower end of the price spectrum.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District continued to expand at a moderate pace in the latest reporting period, and labor 
markets have remained steady and tight. Input prices continued to increase moderately, while selling prices were up 
only modestly. Manufacturers reported continued brisk growth in activity, and businesses engaged in wholesale trade 
and information noted a pickup in activity since the last report. However, contacts in professional & business services 
and health & education services generally characterized business activity as flat. Consumer spending was generally 
steady since the last report, while consumer confidence edged up. Housing markets have been mixed but, on balance, 
a bit stronger, though the high end of the market has been soft. Commercial real estate markets were mostly steady. 
New residential construction activity has slowed further, while commercial construction has been steady to weaker. 
Finally, banks reported a pickup in demand for home mortgage loans and lower delinquency rates across all loan cate-
gories.    
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight. One major employ-
ment agency in New York City and another in upstate 
New York both described the job market as tight but 
steady, with only modest upward pressure on wages in 
most industries. Businesses continued to report difficulty 
finding qualified workers.   
Business contacts in manufacturing and in most service-
sector industries reported that they have added jobs on 
net, though to a modest degree. Similarly, hiring plans 
for the months ahead are subdued but positive, on net.  
Overall, wages have continued to rise at a modest pace, 
though contacts in education & health, leisure & hospital-
ity, and real estate report somewhat more widespread 
wage hikes.      
Prices  
Businesses generally indicated that input prices contin-
ued to rise moderately, though contacts in retail, real 
estate, and education & health noted more widespread 
increases.  
Selling prices overall continued to rise modestly, though 
contacts in the retail and leisure & hospitality industries 
noted increasingly widespread price increases in the 
latest reporting period. One noteworthy example has 
been ticket prices at Broadway theaters, which have 
been running about 12 percent ahead of comparable 
2016 levels. On the other hand, prices of used vehicles 
have softened, and some general merchandise retailers 
have recently become more aggressive with price dis-
counting and promotional activity. Education & health 
firms reported moderate increases in prices received, 
while contacts in other industries generally reported that 
selling prices were steady.    
Consumer Spending 
Retail contacts reported that sales have been mixed but, 
on balance, flat in recent weeks. Retailers in upstate 
New York indicated that both traffic and sales activity 
have been steady and little changed from a year earlier. 
A general merchandise chain indicates that sales in the 
District have picked up and were ahead of plan but still 
down slightly from a year earlier. Retail inventories were 
generally reported to be steady and at satisfactory lev-
els.  
Auto sales, on the other hand, have remained solid. 
Dealers in upstate New York reported that demand for 
new vehicles was fairly robust in September and that 
sales were up from a year earlier, led by strong leasing 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
activity. New auto sales across upstate have been near 
record highs. Used vehicle sales have been steady to 
modestly stronger. Vehicle inventories were said to be at 
satisfactory levels. Retail and wholesale credit conditions 
have remained favorable, according to dealers.  
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA), which was already at a fairly high level, edged 
up further in September.   
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported continued brisk growth in busi-
ness activity in recent weeks. Contacts in the wholesale 
trade sector noted a pickup in growth, while those in the 
transportation industry continued to report modest 
growth. Looking ahead, manufacturers and wholesalers 
remained broadly optimistic about the near-term outlook, 
while transportation firms have grown considerably less 
optimistic.      
Services 
Service-sector firms generally reported sluggish growth. 
Contacts in both professional & business services and 
education & health services noted that activity was flat, 
on balance, while firms in the information and leisure & 
hospitality industries noted a pickup in growth. Service 
sector businesses remained mildly optimistic about the 
near-term outlook, except in the professional & business 
services industry, where contacts were considerably less 
upbeat than in recent months.  
Broadway theaters reported that attendance and reve-
nues were fairly strong through the first half of Septem-
ber but have tapered off in recent weeks, with attend-
ance falling below comparable 2016 levels.         
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, moderately stronger. Real estate con-
tacts in upstate New York report that sales volume has 
been hampered by a lack of inventory, while prices have 
continued to climb, with homes often selling for above 
the asking price. In the suburbs around New York City, 
home sales volume has been strong and prices have 
accelerated somewhat, though the high end of the mar-
ket continues to lag, reflecting excess supply. New York 
City’s condo and co-op market has strengthened mod-
estly; home prices have continued to rise moderately in 
Brooklyn and Queens but have risen only slightly in 
Manhattan. Across the city, the high end has continued 
to lag; sellers have become more negotiable and this 
has boosted activity somewhat.  
Rental markets have also been mixed. Rents in and 
around New York City have been rising moderately for 
smaller apartments but declining for larger and pricier 
units. Landlord concessions have leveled off but remain 
fairly widespread. 
Commercial real estate markets have mostly remained 
steady. The market for office space has softened further 
in upstate New York, Long Island and Brooklyn but has 
been steady to slightly stronger in Manhattan and north-
ern New Jersey. Vacancy rates for industrial space, 
which had been declining steadily in recent years, have 
leveled off in and around New York City, though they 
have continued to decline in upstate New York. Industrial 
rents have continued to rise at a brisk pace throughout 
the District.  
Single-family home construction has been sluggish—
particularly for low and mid-priced homes—and appears 
to have tapered off somewhat since the last report. New 
multi-family construction starts have picked up further in 
northern New Jersey but have remained lackluster 
across the rest of the District. Still, there continues to be 
a good amount of ongoing multi-family construction in 
progress throughout the District. Similarly, new commer-
cial development—of both office and industrial space—
has strengthened further in northern New Jersey but has 
been increasingly sluggish across the rest of the District.    
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
higher demand for residential mortgages but no change 
in demand for consumer loans, commercial mortgages, 
or commercial & industrial loans. Bankers also reported 
that refinancing activity decreased, on net. Contacts 
reported tighter credit standards for commercial mort-
gages, and unchanged credit standards across all other 
loan categories. Banks reported higher loan spreads 
overall, largely reflecting higher spreads on commercial 
mortgages. Respondents also reported an increase in 
the average deposit rate. Bankers reported lower delin-
quency rates across all loan categories.  ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Manufacturing, nonfinancial services, new home sales, and tourism grew modestly; nonresidential construction 
and leasing appeared to grow slightly; and nonauto retail sales and new home construction activity exhibited little 
change. Auto sales, which had declined modestly in the prior period, showed modest growth in the current period. On 
balance, wages and prices continued to grow at a modest pace, but employment flattened out. Overall, firms appear to 
anticipate continued modest growth over the next six months, with a larger percentage of firms expecting growth. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment changed little during the Beige Book period, 
slowing from a modest pace of growth in the prior period. 
Reports of net additions to staff were subdued for both 
manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms, and most 
contacts reported no change in staff levels. Average 
hours worked decreased over the period for manufactur-
ing firms but held steady among nonmanufacturers.  
On balance, wage growth held steady at a modest pace. 
Staffing firms and other contacts generally reported 
steady wage growth and tight labor markets in certain 
areas and for certain occupations. One staffing firm 
noted strong order activity and a need to act quickly to fill 
positions.   
Prices  
On balance, prices continued to rise modestly. Among 
manufacturing contacts, more firms reported increases, 
particularly in input costs, during the current period than 
the prior period; slightly fewer service-sector contacts 
reported input cost increases. A majority of contacts 
indicated no change in prices paid and received.  
Retailers and banking contacts generally noted no signs 
of inflation, while homebuilders reported further       
increases in lumber costs. Overall, existing home prices 
continued to edge up. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity continued at a mod-
est pace of growth and showed signs of improvement. 
Higher percentages of firms reported increases in new 
orders and shipments compared with the prior period.  
Firms in most sectors continued to note gains in both 
new orders and shipments, including makers of paper 
products, chemicals, fabricated metal products, industrial 
machinery, and electronic products.  
Generally, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
growth over the next six months. The percentage of firms 
expecting future increases for general activity rose, while 
it held mostly steady for future increases in capital ex-
penditures and employment.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail contacts reported little change in sales, on 
balance, similar to the prior Beige Book period. An out-
lets operator reported modest, but slowing, sales growth 
in August and September, with strength in shoes and 
jeans as well as housewares and furniture. Convenience 
store contacts indicated a slight pickup in traffic and 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
spending in September, which they attributed more to 
favorable weather than to a shift in the sales trend.  
Auto dealers throughout the region reported modest 
increases in year-over-year sales this period, an im-
provement from the modest declines during the prior 
period. New Jersey dealers indicated that the pickup in 
sales was driven by incentives and wondered how man-
ufacturers would alter incentives around a spike in de-
mand following the recent hurricanes. Although sales 
remained generally in line with the high levels seen in 
2016, dealers continued to face difficulty sustaining 
profitability.  
Tourism contacts generally indicated a continuation of 
modest growth. Strong gains were reported from the 
Poconos and shore locations in Delaware and New 
Jersey. A New Jersey banking contact indicated that 
activity remained strong through the end of September, 
and the shore market had its best year in quite some 
time. Atlantic City’s casino revenues were flat in August 
relative to the previous year, propped up by Internet 
gaming. A Philadelphia analyst noted stronger-than-
expected hotel demand but year-over-year decreases in 
room rates because of fewer citywide conventions this 
year compared with last year.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Service-sector firms continued to report modest growth 
in general activity since the prior Beige Book period, and 
new orders and sales strengthened further, on balance. 
One large service-sector firm noted continued improve-
ment in the payment performance of its customers. 
Expectations about future growth remained elevated, 
with nearly 60 percent of the firms anticipating increased 
activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth of overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) — similar to the prior 
Beige Book period. Loan volumes grew modestly in most 
categories, including auto loans and other consumer 
loans, while commercial real estate loans grew slightly. 
Commercial and industrial loan volumes improved over 
the period, posting modest growth following declines 
over the prior Beige Book period. Credit card volumes — 
which are highly seasonal — continued to grow at a 
modest rate over the Beige Book period but outpaced 
growth in the comparable year-ago period. In general, 
banking contacts tended to describe economic growth as 
slow and steady.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders generally reported little change during the 
current period, similar to the previous period. The current 
period covered weeks that are typically slow for traffic 
and contract signings; some builders reported no real 
pickup at the end of September following the expected 
slow period.   
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
continued to report modest growth of existing home 
sales, but no increase of inventories. One broker noted 
general slowing in pending sales and does not expect 
the supply of homes to significantly increase for some 
time.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts continued to report 
slight growth in construction and leasing activity. Con-
tractors reported that despite a slight softening over the 
summer, overall, labor hours have picked up in Septem-
ber, suggesting more new construction activity. This year 
has been the second most active year in the past five 
years (behind 2016), and contacts expect activity to keep 
up in 2018. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Fourth District expanded at a moderate pace since our last report. Labor markets expanded 
broadly, with employers looking for low- and high-skilled workers. Wage pressures were felt primarily in the construction 
and nonfinancial services industries. Upward pressure on prices paid increased across industry sectors; however, pro-
ducers and service providers found it challenging to raise selling prices. Consumer spending at retail establishments 
was little changed, while new motor vehicle sales strengthened. Manufacturing output grew at a modest pace overall, 
but production at District motor vehicle assembly plants trended lower. Nonfinancial services and freight transport firms 
saw moderate gains in activity. Year-to-date residential real estate sales stayed above year-ago levels. Base prices for 
new homes rose. Activity in the commercial real estate market remained elevated.  
Employment and Wages  
The past two months saw a boost in hiring across all 
reporting industries, with the strongest activity seen in 
construction, banking, and nonfinancial services. Many 
of our contacts reported creating new jobs during the 
current cycle, and a majority said that they have re-
placed departed workers. Greatest demand was for high-
skilled workers, such as engineers and those in the 
building trades, and for low-skilled workers. Demand for 
the latter group was attributed to difficulties in retaining 
employees. A building contractor reported that his firm 
recently hired 15 newly graduated engineers and has 
openings for 10 additional entry-level engineers, but the 
firm has difficulty attracting qualified candidates. A cham-
ber of commerce executive said that in order to avoid 
employee turnover, firms are incentivizing workers with 
bonuses and higher wages. This strategy has resulted in 
narrowing the wage gap between low- and middle-wage 
workers, drawing criticism from middle-wage workers. 
Competitive market conditions were cited as the primary 
factor for increasing wages, particularly in the construc-
tion and nonfinancial services sectors.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on prices paid increased moderately 
across industry sectors since our last report. The share 
of contacts who cited rising input prices is at its highest 
level since early in the second quarter and was most 
widespread in the manufacturing and construction sec-
tors. Several manufacturers reported rising prices for 
ferrous metals, increases which they attributed in part to 
domestic trade policies. For the most part, these higher 
input prices were passed through to the end user. Prices 
for natural and synthetic fabrics used in apparel manu-
facturing remain at a relatively low level. Selling prices 
rose slightly overall during the current cycle, and the 
share of companies increasing prices for their products 
or services was lower than in the first half of 2017. Sev-
eral manufacturers and service providers reported that 
close scrutiny by customers’ procurement officers com-
bined with global competition is making it difficult for 
them to raise their selling prices.  
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported little change in consumer spending 
during the period. Department store chains are seeming-
ly performing better than their specialty counterparts. 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
One department store chain cited increased demand, 
which was qualified by citing an increase in traffic. A fast 
food chain reported much better results because of the 
introduction of new products and technology. An apparel 
retailer believes the removal of the border-adjustment 
tax proposal from the federal tax reform debate has 
eliminated an element of uncertainty and risk to the retail 
industry. Year-to-date unit sales through August of new 
motor vehicles rose almost 3 percent compared to those 
of a year ago. Auto dealers were concerned about above
-normal new-vehicle inventory, which they attributed to 
an imbalance in supply and demand.   
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector picked up from that 
of the previous reporting period; however, the overall 
pace of growth was modest. Several of our contacts 
cited confidence in the economy on the part of custom-
ers as the primary contributor to a rise in new orders. 
Other factors cited as contributing to the expansion in 
output include a strong housing market and strengthen-
ing in the oil and gas and primary materials industries. A 
few contacts reported an increase in orders for capital 
goods. Demand for consumer packaged products re-
mained below projections. Year-to-date production 
through August at District auto assembly plants declined 
about 18 percent when compared to that of the same 
period a year earlier. Much of the decline can be attribut-
ed to retooling for three next-generation vehicles. The 
pickup in spending for structures and product develop-
ment that began in the second quarter has weakened. 
However, contacts reported increased spending on IT 
equipment and services. Many manufacturers remain 
bullish in their outlook for the economy.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Year-to-date unit sales through August of new and exist-
ing single-family homes increased almost 2 percent 
compared to those of a year earlier. The average sales 
price rose 5 percent. Demand for new homes is stable 
across price points. Upward pressure on base prices is 
increasing because of rising development costs and 
rising prices for labor and materials. Builders are con-
cerned that rising base prices may force some first-time 
buyers out of the market. Year-to-date estimates of 
single-family construction starts thru August are about 10 
percent higher compared to those of a year earlier.   
Nonresidential construction activity remains at elevated 
levels. Property development was broad based except 
for retail, for which demand continued to be weak. Back-
logs were relatively stable, although three contacts de-
scribed their backlogs as very strong and higher than 
projected. That said, contacts reported a downturn in 
inquires beginning in the third quarter. One general 
contractor observed that companies that do site work are 
seeking jobs. As site preparation is the first phase of a 
project, this situation is a leading indicator of a potential 
slowdown in construction activity. Another builder said 
that in his industry things just sometimes calm down 
unexpectedly for no particular reason. Office vacancy 
rates remain stable, and asking rents are slowly rising. A 
strong increase was reported in selling prices for office 
properties during the first half of 2017 compared to those 
of a year ago, while selling prices of industrial properties 
were stable. Apartment rental increases were moderate. 
Banking 
On balance, business lending grew slightly over the 
period. Community bankers were more upbeat in their 
assessment of credit markets than were their counter-
parts at large banks. A few large bankers reported that 
loan demand is softening because of political uncertainty, 
with customers taking a wait-and-see approach. Con-
sumer lending was largely stable. Fixed-rate purchase 
mortgages were in high demand, while credit card lend-
ing has softened, a situation one banker attributed to 
seasonal factors. Bankers reported improving loan quali-
ty. Loan application standards were little changed other 
than some easing in auto lending.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Freight volume generally increased beyond what can be 
accounted for by seasonal factors. Two carriers de-
scribed intermodal as very strong. Other contacts report-
ed increased volume because of a surge in e-commerce 
and an expansion in the oil and gas industry. There is 
concern about the industry’s facing capacity constraints 
by year’s end because of electronic logging device re-
quirements and rebuilding from recent hurricanes.  
Professional and business services firms reported mod-
erate gains in activity during the period. Strongest de-
mand was seen by management consulting and IT ser-
vices firms. A majority of our contacts reported that their 
customers are bullish on the economy and as a result 
are willing to invest more in technology.  ■  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy grew at a moderate pace since our previous report, with some respondents attributing in-
creased activity to the recent hurricanes. Manufacturing firms continued to report moderate growth in new orders and 
shipments. Ports and trucking companies saw robust growth in cargo movements, which was partially due to ships 
being rerouted to district ports from areas affected by hurricanes. Retail sales picked up slightly, overall, including those 
for building materials to support hurricane relief efforts. Tourism and travel activity remained strong. Commercial leasing 
rose modestly, on balance. Loan demand picked up moderately in recent weeks, driven by commercial activity. Services 
firms generally indicated moderate revenue growth. Labor demand strengthened moderately and wage pressures 
broadened. Prices rose at a moderate pace. Supply chain disruptions drove some input prices higher. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand continued to strengthen moderately in 
recent weeks and labor markets remained tight. Alt-
hough employment agencies reported a slight increase 
in new job openings, that increase was lower than 
expected going in to the fall recruiting season. They 
continue to anticipate an increase in openings in com-
ing months. Wage increases remained modest, but 
more contacts noted increased wage pressures. Exec-
utives reported difficulty finding qualified machinists 
and machine operators, engineers, construction work-
ers and contractors, executive assistants, mechanics, 
and nurses. Trucking companies continued to struggle 
finding drivers, despite an increase in drivers’ wages 
across the industry. 
Prices  
On balance, prices grew at a moderate pace since our 
previous report. According to our most recent surveys, 
manufacturing input prices increased moderately and 
continued to grow at a faster pace than final goods 
prices. Manufacturers said that supply chain disrup-
tions from the recent hurricanes drove some raw mate-
rials prices higher, particularly for resins, lumber, and 
petroleum-based products. Services firms indicated 
that price growth decelerated slightly in recent weeks 
but remained at a modest level, overall. Agriculture 
commodity prices increased modestly for poultry, eggs, 
wheat, and sugar in recent weeks and were expected to 
rise further as a result of the recent hurricanes. A food 
manufacturer also expressed concerns about future 
price increases for plastic wrap. Prices continued to rise 
for transportation services, construction materials, and 
health insurance premiums. Coal and natural gas prices 
rose moderately.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing firms reported moderate 
growth in new orders and shipments in recent weeks. 
Medical equipment producers and furniture manufactur-
ers noted a recent pickup in new orders, while metal 
manufacturers continued to see improved business 
conditions. Additionally, a packaging manufacturer re-
ported increased shipments with the opening of its new 
fulfillment center. Contacts generally experienced slightly 
longer vendor lead times. Expectations remained opti-
mistic for the next six months, as producers anticipated 
increases in new orders and shipments.  
Ports and Transportation 
District ports continued to see robust growth in shipment 
volumes in recent months and expected the strength to 
persist in coming months. In August, one District port 
reported its largest volume ever and another reported its 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
second-largest on record. Ports continued to see strong-
er growth in imports than in exports. District ports report-
ed seeing increased traffic as incoming ships were re-
routed from hurricane affected areas. Trucking compa-
nies also reported strong business conditions, easily 
loading trucks to capacity. Firms noted that a portion of 
the recent uptick was a result of the recent hurricanes, 
as trucks brought relief shipments to affected areas. 
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales rose slightly, overall, since our previous 
report. Hardware and construction material providers 
saw an increase in demand resulting from the hurricane, 
which led to higher prices of hardware and lumber. An 
auto dealer in North Carolina reported a slight increase 
in sales and customer traffic but noted uncertainties 
about how the hurricanes would affect the used vehicle 
market. Meanwhile, a sporting goods company in West 
Virginia said that sales continued to slow as some manu-
facturers opted to sell directly to customers. 
The Fifth District saw strong tourism in recent months. A 
West Virginia resort experienced bookings 12 percent to 
15 percent above expectation. A Virginia outdoor adven-
ture center credited strong business to early fall weather 
and visiting school groups. Coastal North Carolina wit-
nessed tourism above the seasonal norm, and some 
businesses claimed it was the best season they have 
ever had. Some hotels reported an influx of people due 
to Hurricane Irma evacuations, but believed tourism 
might be depressed in the near future as hurricane vic-
tims might be less likely to travel later this year.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate reports were more mixed com-
pared to the previous report. Agents in Charlotte, 
Durham, and Washington D.C. reported modest sales 
growth, but elsewhere most brokers noted a modest 
decline in home sales as inventory remained low, partic-
ularly in the $200,000 to $400,000 price range. Home 
prices continued to rise modestly. Average days on the 
market were unchanged since the previous report, most 
contacts stated that homes were on the market for about 
60 days. New home sales improved modestly in recent 
weeks. A broker said that new home communities in 
more desirable locations continued to have steady sales, 
while most builders were keeping standing inventory low.  
Commercial real estate leasing rose modestly in recent 
weeks, as brokers reported more demand in urban loca-
tions. Vacancy rates were unchanged from the previous 
report, with most contacts noting steady, low rates 
across markets. Rental rates were stable to increasing 
modestly. Commercial construction accounts were 
mixed. Office and warehouse construction increased in 
Raleigh and Charlotte, North Carolina and Charleston, 
South Carolina, while in Washington, D.C., retail devel-
opment slowed somewhat. Multifamily construction 
continued at a steady pace in large urban markets but 
was limited elsewhere.    
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan demand rose moderately in recent weeks. 
Reports on residential mortgage demand varied by loca-
tion but was generally described as stable to increasing 
modestly. On the commercial side, real estate loan de-
mand strengthened moderately, with a notable uptick 
reported in the greater Raleigh, North Carolina area. 
Business lending improved slightly, on balance. Deposits 
grew moderately as bankers reported growth in both 
CDs and checking accounts. Short term interest rates 
were reported as unchanged to up slightly. Competition 
among banks remained aggressive with some reports of 
extended term durations and non-recourse loans being 
offered, which led to concerns about softening credit 
standards. Credit quality remained stable at strong lev-
els. Late payments and delinquency rates trended lower.  
Non-Financial Services 
Services firms indicated moderate revenue growth, 
according to our most recent surveys, and remained 
optimistic for demand to improve further over the next six 
months. The strongest reports came from construction 
related services, including civil engineering, home repair, 
maintenance, and contractor services. Telecommunica-
tion services, amusement facilities, and performing arts 
studios also indicated a pickup in business in recent 
weeks. A marketing firm in Virginia reported an exten-
sion to an existing contract but a lot of competition for 
new business. Health care service providers were less 
upbeat and one hospital system administrator expressed 
concerns over rising insurance costs.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Coal production was little changed in recent weeks while 
natural gas production rose slightly. On the whole, agri-
culture conditions were unchanged as the growing sea-
son progressed; however, some farms in South Carolina 
were flooded by Hurricane Irma. A hardwood producer 
reported a moderate rise in export demand in the flooring 
market while cabinetry demand softened somewhat. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aside from hurricane effects, Sixth District business contacts described economic conditions as improving at a modest 
pace from mid-August through September. The outlook among firms remained optimistic with the majority of contacts 
expecting growth to be slightly above current levels for the remainder of the year. Most firms continued to cite labor 
market tightness, but with few reports of wage pressures. Overall input cost pressures were muted. Most merchants 
cited steady sales growth since the previous reporting period; however, automobile dealers continued to note softening 
sales. Hospitality, energy, and agriculture contacts reported that activity was greatly affected by Hurricane Irma. Resi-
dential real estate contacts suggested that home sales and prices were slightly ahead of last year's levels. Manufactur-
ers indicated that new orders and production increased. Bankers noted that credit continued to be available.   
Employment and Wages  
District business contacts reported that job growth was 
steady since the previous report, though challenges 
filling construction, information technology, finance, 
transportation, and nursing positions persisted. Energy 
sector contacts experienced ongoing difficulties filling 
skilled craft positions. Firms continued to develop and 
utilize internal and external training programs to help 
produce qualified workers. Commercial and residential 
construction industry contacts further indicated that labor 
shortages were restraining growth. Businesses contin-
ued to engage in partnerships with the educational and 
workforce development community to fill specific industry 
or individual firms’ skill gaps. Broadly, businesses contin-
ued to use non-wage mechanisms to attract and retain 
workers. While it is early to gauge the impact of Hurri-
canes Harvey and Irma on southeastern labor markets, 
some contacts expect the hospitality, retail, and con-
struction industries to be the most impacted, particularly 
in Florida and Louisiana. 
Wage growth remained steady, with the exception of 
continued wage pressures for some high-skilled posi-
tions and increased reports of rising wages in the con-
struction industry. Business plans for future compensa-
tion, on balance, continued to be reported as modest for 
the coming year.    
Prices  
Firms reported that overall input costs were mostly flat. 
Although there were reports of limited pricing power, 
most businesses have been able to pass along commod-
ity input cost increases. The Atlanta Fed’s Business 
Inflation Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit 
costs were up 1.7 percent in September. Survey re-
spondents also remarked that they expect unit costs to 
rise 1.9 percent over the next twelve months. Early re-
ports from Florida construction contacts indicated that 
costs, which were already rising, were expected to in-
crease significantly due to hurricane rebuilding efforts.    
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Overall, retail sales growth was unchanged since the last 
report, although contacts in Florida reported an increase 
in retail sales of building materials in preparation for and 
following Hurricane Irma. Auto dealers continued to 
report a slow-down in momentum of auto sales com-
pared to a year ago, though some expect sales to in-
crease from replacement activity due to the hurricanes. 
Tourism in Florida was heavily impacted by Hurricane 
Irma, although it is too soon to gauge the full extent of 
the impact. Hotels and restaurants remained closed due 
to power outages and downed trees for up to three 
weeks on the west coast of Florida while the remainder 
of the state was functional within a week. Reports from 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta  
the Florida Keys indicated that some major hotels and 
resorts may take up to six months to rebuild. Georgia 
and Louisiana experienced an uptick in visitors displaced 
from Florida. In spite of hurricane related set backs, 
contacts from the tourism and hospitality sector remain 
optimistic for the remainder of the year.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from residential real estate contacts in August 
signaled modest growth prior to Hurricane Irma’s land-
fall. Builders said construction activity was slightly up 
from the year-ago level. Many brokers and builders 
indicated home sales were up slightly relative to the year
-ago level. The majority of contacts noted that buyer 
traffic was flat to slightly down and inventory levels were 
down from the year-ago level. Both builders and brokers 
continued to report gains in home prices. Many builders 
expect home sales to be flat over the next three months 
relative to the same period last year, while the majority of 
brokers anticipate slightly higher sales. Most builders 
expect that construction activity will match or marginally 
surpass the current pace over the next three months. 
Many commercial real estate contacts reported improve-
ments in demand that resulted in rent growth, but cau-
tioned that the rate of improvement varied by metropoli-
tan area, submarket, and property type. The majority of 
commercial contractors indicated that the pace of non-
residential construction activity had increased from one 
year ago; most reported healthy backlogs. Several re-
ports noted that the pace of multifamily construction 
matched or exceeded the year-ago level. Commercial 
construction contacts’ expectations for the pace of non-
residential construction were mixed, while their outlook 
for the pace of multifamily construction leveled off. Flori-
da contacts suggested that construction activity will 
increase significantly due to hurricane rebuilding efforts.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts indicated that the pace of overall 
activity increased since the last report. Purchasing man-
agers noted a rise in new orders and production levels, 
as well as an increase in the pace of hiring. Supplier 
delivery times were reported as getting longer and fin-
ished inventory levels increased somewhat. The overall 
outlook was relatively unchanged from the previous 
report, with close to half of firms surveyed expecting 
higher production over the next six months.    
Transportation 
Transportation firms reported varying levels of activity 
since the previous report. Ports experienced continued 
growth in container trade and roll-on/roll-off cargo. Rail-
roads reported that total rail traffic was down compared 
with the same period last year as shipments of grain, 
farm products, petroleum and petroleum products, and 
non-metallic minerals saw double-digit declines. Inter-
modal traffic, however, was up moderately. Trucking 
contacts cited considerable increases in freight volume 
month-over-month. While Hurricane Irma caused tempo-
rary disruptions for Florida transportation contacts, most 
reported a return to normalcy within a week after the 
storm.     
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers, although some small and minority-owned busi-
nesses experienced difficulty obtaining credit. Liquidity 
was plentiful, but competition restrained lending at some 
banks. Auto dealer contacts described a slowdown in 
auto lending due to slowing sales and rising interest 
rates. Credit remained widely available to businesses 
seeking operating and expansion capital.     
Energy  
Contacts indicated that inventories decreased as a result 
of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma. Retail demand continued 
to put pressure on supply to affected areas, particularly 
those without pipeline access. Refineries resumed pro-
duction a few days after the hurricane hit. Utility compa-
nies restored power within two weeks to areas affected 
with the exception of significantly wind damaged loca-
tions in the Keys. Overall, contacts reported that utilities 
continued to experience a decline in residential and 
industrial sales and commercial sales remained flat.    
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. Al-
though damage assessments are still being made, 
Irma’s heavy rains and high winds resulted in significant 
damage to Florida’s agriculture industry as well as crop 
damage in parts of Georgia and Alabama. Tennessee’s 
corn harvest closely tracked the five-year average. The 
District’s cotton harvest and the soybean harvests in 
Mississippi and Tennessee were mostly on par with five 
year averages. Both the Louisiana and Mississippi rice 
harvests were ahead of their five-year averages. On a 
year-over-year basis, prices paid to farmers in August 
were up for corn, broilers, and eggs but were down for 
cotton, rice, soybeans, and beef. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District continued at a modest rate in late August and September, and con-
tacts expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment, business spending, and 
manufacturing increased modestly, while consumer spending increased slightly. Construction and real estate activity 
was little changed, as were financial sector conditions. Wages and prices rose modestly. Contacts expected the Dis-
trict’s corn and soybean harvests to be close to trend, but smaller than last year’s record. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest rate over the 
reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue at 
that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Contacts contin-
ued to indicate that the labor market was tight and re-
ported difficulty filling positions at all skill levels. A con-
tact in the construction industry indicated that increased 
demand in the southern US related to hurricanes Harvey 
and Irma had forced them to rework their production 
schedule due to a lack of workers. Across all industries, 
hiring was primarily focused on professional and tech-
nical, sales, and production workers, with a notable 
increase in the number of contacts looking to hire pro-
duction workers. That said, a staffing firm that primarily 
supplies manufacturers with production workers reported 
little change in billable hours. Wage growth remained 
modest overall. Contacts most often cited wage increas-
es for professional and technical, sales, and production 
workers, but there were also reports that growing de-
mand for transportation services was pushing up wages 
for truckers. 
Prices  
Prices again rose modestly overall in late August and 
September. Retail prices were little changed for most 
categories, though there continued to be reports of rising 
prices for older used cars. A number of contacts again 
reported increases in costs for raw materials and em-
ployee benefits. Transportation costs were also higher, 
and one contact attributed some of the increase to ele-
vated demand related to hurricanes Harvey and Irma. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased slightly over the reporting 
period. Non-auto retail sales were mixed, with growth in 
the personal services, food and beverage, and discount 
segments balanced by declines at mainstream brick and 
mortar stores. Retailers indicated that they expected 
sales during the upcoming holiday season to be slightly 
higher than last year. Light vehicle sales strengthened 
somewhat, and the vehicle mix continued to shift from 
cars to light trucks. The pace of used vehicle sales 
slowed a bit. 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending remained at modest pace 
in late August and September. In general, retail invento-
ries were at desired levels, though stocks remained high 
for cars and low for light trucks, particularly crossovers. 
Manufacturing inventories were at comfortable levels 
overall, though steel service center inventories were 
lower than historical norms. Growth in capital spending 
remained at a modest rate, and contacts expected 
growth to continue at that pace for the next 6 to 12 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
months. Outlays were primarily for replacing industrial 
and IT equipment and for renovating structures, though 
there was an increase in the number of contacts report-
ing spending for expansion. Demand for residential, 
commercial, and industrial electricity was flat. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was little changed 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased slightly, as greater demand for starter homes 
led more builders to enter the market. There were re-
ports that in some areas newly built starter homes were 
receiving multiple offers and closing well above the 
original asking price because of limited availability. Over-
all, home sales edged lower as tight inventories con-
strained sales in the low-end segment and weak demand 
hurt sales in the high-end segment. Home prices were 
up slightly overall, but growth varied by price level: prices 
increased noticeably for homes under $250,000, mod-
estly for homes between $250,000 and $500,000, and 
were down slightly for homes over $500,000. Nonresi-
dential construction edged lower across most market 
segments. Commercial real estate activity remained 
strong, and edged up further. Commercial rents in-
creased slightly, vacancy rates moved lower, and the 
availability of sublease space changed little. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production generally continued 
at a modest pace in late August and September. Growth 
did pick up for some industries: Improved international 
conditions led to solid gains for heavy machinery produc-
ers; hurricanes Harvey and Irma boosted sales of con-
struction materials and RVs (FEMA trailers are modified 
RVs); and heavy truck manufacturers and producers of 
packing materials reported strong increases in demand. 
Contacts in most other industries reported little change in 
conditions. Activity in the auto sector was flat. Demand 
for steel continued to grow slowly, though producers 
expected that improved international demand and tight 
inventories at service centers would soon lead to more 
orders. Specialty metals manufacturers reported modest 
increases overall, and highlighted improved demand 
from the aerospace and defense sectors.  
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Market participants noted that equi-
ty prices remained high and volatility remained low. 
Business loan demand increased slightly, with growth 
coming primarily from higher capital equipment and real 
estate spending by the manufacturing and construction 
sectors. Contacts again indicated that robust competition 
was creating pressure to lower rates and loosen terms. 
Consumer loan demand increased slightly. Demand for 
both home and auto loans picked up and quality re-
mained good. That said, an auto dealer indicated that 
credit continued to tighten for buyers of new cars with 
low credit scores. 
Agriculture 
Contacts expected both the corn and soybean harvests 
to be close to trend but smaller than last year’s record. 
On balance, crop conditions worsened in late August 
and September as drought conditions spread in the 
District. In addition, suboptimal weather conditions earli-
er in the year meant crops were less mature than normal 
and that the harvest started later than usual. Corn prices 
moved down (but were still higher than a year ago), 
while soybean prices were little changed (and slightly 
lower than a year ago). With the exception of eggs, 
livestock and dairy prices were down as supplies stayed 
plentiful. New hog processing plants in Iowa and Michi-
gan were ramping up more slowly than planned because 
labor was in short supply. Prospects for agriculture in-
comes declined overall during the reporting period. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts suggest economic conditions have continued to improve at a modest pace since our previous 
report. Labor markets remain tight, with positions remaining unfilled; employment was little changed. Contacts report 
moderate growth in wages, while broader price pressures remain modest. Reports on consumer spending improved 
since our previous report, although reports from auto dealers remain mixed. The District continues to see relatively 
stronger growth in both the manufacturing and banking sectors, although growth in both sectors has decelerated some-
what since the beginning of the year. 
Employment and Wages  
Anecdotal evidence suggests little change in employ-
ment since the previous report. Contacts continued to 
report difficulties finding experienced or qualified employ-
ees. A construction contact in Little Rock noted that high 
levels of real estate activity have created a shortage of 
skilled workers, and a transportation contact reported 
that the shortage of truck drivers worsened. Several 
contacts reported that potential employees’ lack of trans-
portation to and from work has posed a challenge to 
hiring. 
Contacts have reported moderate growth in wages since 
the previous report. A contact in Little Rock reported 
increasing compensation as part of an effort to retain 
staff, while another contact reported moderate increases 
for both hourly and salaried employees throughout the 
area.  
Prices  
Price pressures have increased modestly since the 
previous report. Residential real estate prices continued 
to rise moderately throughout most of the District. Non-
residential real estate price pressures were mixed: A 
contact in Little Rock reported a decrease in industrial 
rents, while a contact in Memphis reported an increase. 
Construction costs declined slightly. Steel prices fell 
slightly, and a contact in Little Rock reported that wood 
product prices continued to decrease modestly. Due to 
low water levels, barge rates along the Mississippi and 
Illinois rivers increased significantly. 
Energy prices increased moderately since the previous 
report. In Illinois and Kentucky, coal prices rose modest-
ly. In Arkansas, Mississippi, and Tennessee, Hurricane 
Harvey caused relatively strong increases in gasoline 
prices compared with national prices. Cotton, rice, soy-
bean, and wheat prices increased moderately, while 
sorghum prices were flat and corn prices decreased 
modestly. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate consumer spending has grown modestly 
since our previous report. Although August’s real sales 
tax collections decreased in Arkansas and Kentucky 
relative to a year ago, they increased in Missouri and 
Tennessee. Consumer confidence increased substantial-
ly in West Tennessee, as households indicated their 
willingness to spend more in the next few months rela-
tive to a year ago. Reports from auto dealers were 
mixed; although some dealers in the Memphis area 
indicated strong sales, dealers in Little Rock noted slow-
er foot traffic and are less optimistic that 2017 sales will 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis  
exceed last year’s. Hospitality contacts in Missouri and 
Tennessee indicated that business activity has increased 
and exceeded expectations since our previous report.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased moderately since 
our previous report. Manufacturing production, invento-
ries, and employment growth were all stronger than one 
month earlier in both Arkansas and Missouri. However, 
new manufacturing orders grew at a slower rate in both 
states. 
Contacts in several industries across the District report-
ed increased sales, including industrial pipe manufactur-
ing and plastic manufacturing. However, a contact in the 
plastic product manufacturing industry noted a drop in 
requests for quotes from new customers. A contact in 
the wood product manufacturing industry reported that 
production has outpaced demand. 
Nonfinancial Services 
The nonfinancial services sector has expanded at a 
modest pace since the previous report. Firms that pro-
vide transportation and logistics services are reporting 
plans to increase employment and renovate existing 
structures. Demand for commercial trucking from firms 
headquartered in the District is up from Hurricane Har-
vey relief efforts and expected to remain elevated during 
rebuilding efforts. Several firms that provide professional 
business and information services are reporting plans to 
expand and increase employment. Reports from 
healthcare firms remain mixed. Employers continue to 
streamline operations in an uncertain environment, with 
one major employer shifting jobs from low-profit to high-
profit areas. 
Real Estate and Construction 
There was little change in residential real estate activity 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for August ticked up slightly relative to the previous 
month across the District’s four major MSAs, and year-to
-date sales remained in line with those from a year ago. 
Local real estate contacts continued to report that signifi-
cant shortages in inventory have hindered sales, particu-
larly for median-priced housing. 
Residential construction activity improved slightly. Au-
gust permit activity within District MSAs increased mod-
estly relative to the previous month. Local contacts re-
ported that lot scarcity and a shortage of labor continue 
to limit new construction. 
Commercial real estate activity was unchanged from the 
previous report. Contacts largely indicated that demand 
remained steady for most property types. A central Ar-
kansas banker reported strong demand for commercial 
real estate loans.  
Commercial construction activity was mixed. August 
nonresidential construction starts dropped slightly within 
the District relative to the previous month, and multifami-
ly permits were below levels from a year ago. However, 
local contacts generally reported a robust level of new 
multifamily construction underway or being planned, and 
several Memphis contractors continued to report opti-
mism regarding future projects. 
Banking and Finance 
Lending activity in the Eighth District improved moder-
ately. According to a survey of 84 small and mid-sized 
District banks, outstanding loan volumes grew by 8 
percent relative to year-ago levels. Loan growth in the 
District has been gradually slowing since the start of 
2017, but it continues to exceed the national rate. Com-
mercial and industrial loan growth has stabilized at 9 
percent after decelerating through the first half of 2017. 
Meanwhile, consumer and commercial real estate lend-
ing grew the fastest among all loan categories, rising by 
11 and 10 percent, respectively. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions improved modestly from 
the previous reporting period. Reports from farmers 
indicated that they have been impressed by their harvest 
numbers so far. Production and yield forecasts improved 
from August to September for corn, cotton, and soy-
beans. For rice expected yields ticked up from August to 
September, while expected production ticked down after 
downward revisions to rice acreage estimates. Relative 
to 2016, District cotton and soybean production levels 
were projected to be higher, while those for corn and rice 
were projected to be lower.  
Natural resource extraction declined slightly from July to 
August, with seasonally adjusted coal production declin-
ing 3 percent. However, August production was 10 per-
cent above the level from one year ago.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly since the last report. Employment fell since the last report, but hiring demand 
remained strong, held back by tight labor markets. Wage pressures were moderate, while price pressures were modest 
overall. The District economy showed growth in services, manufacturing, commercial real estate, residential construc-
tion, and energy. Consumer spending saw only slight growth, and commercial construction was flat; agriculture im-
proved, but remained weak overall, and residential real estate slowed.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment fell since the last report, but hiring demand 
remained strong, held back by tight labor markets. 
Seasonally adjusted August employment levels fell 
across the District, continuing an up-and-down pattern in 
recent months. However, a staffing contact in 
southeastern Minnesota said hiring “is still robust. I have 
no issue getting clients. If I had 100 people, I could put 
them all to work.” A Minnesota labor contact said worker 
demand in hospitality was “stronger than usual going into 
the winter season” for both union and nonunion 
businesses. A large Minnesota entertainment and 
hospitality firm said it had 150 job openings on a steady 
basis at two locations. A Montana source said booth 
registrations at recent career fairs were up 7 percent, 
“indicating more employers are looking to hire.” Two 
September business conditions indexes showed strong 
hiring sentiment in Minnesota and North Dakota, but 
some softness in South Dakota. In Montana, the number 
of job seekers visiting state workforce centers in 
September fell compared with August figures, while the 
number of open job positions grew. A September survey 
of South Dakota retailers by the Minneapolis Fed found 
that more than half were hiring, but most often to fill 
turnover. Contacts in hospitality and construction also 
noted an increase in overtime for workers.  
 
Wages rose moderately since the last report, with some 
mixed signals, but overall showing signs of 
strengthening. A staffing contact said one client has 
raised starting wages three times since June. A South 
Dakota construction contact estimated wage increases 
of 3 percent to 5 percent over last year and expected 
similar increases in the coming year. A Minnesota labor 
union source in the services industry reported increases 
of 3 percent “in most of our units.” In a survey by the 
Minneapolis Fed, 40 percent of South Dakota retailers 
reported wages rising between 1 percent and 3 percent 
over the past year, but with equal percentages above 
and below those levels. Said a Minnesota workforce 
contact, “I get very mixed signals. I hear that wages are 
going up, but when I press, I still see a lot of wage 
increases in the 2 percent to 3 percent range.”   
Prices  
Price pressures remained modest since the last report. 
After spiking in late August, retail fuel prices in District 
states decreased over the following month, but remained 
slightly higher than the previous reporting period. A 
survey of Minneapolis-St. Paul home builders indicated 
increased price expectations for building materials and 
land. Prices received by farmers for corn, wheat, hay, 
milk, hogs, and eggs increased in August compared with 
a year earlier; prices for soybeans, cattle, chickens, and 
turkeys decreased.  
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending rose slightly overall since the last 
report. Automotive sales were reportedly solid, and a 
Minnesota dealer announced a major expansion of 
dealerships in Minneapolis-St. Paul and nearby 
Wisconsin markets. Despite recent closures, especially 
among legacy retailers, new retail stores continued to 
open. Tourism also saw growth. Among the 14 national 
parks in District states with significant summer 
attendance, total August visitors were up 8 percent over 
a year earlier, to more than 3 million—the third 
consecutive month of a visitor increase of at least 5 
percent. August hotel demand in Minnesota increased by 
1 percent from a year earlier, with Rochester and 
Minneapolis-St. Paul growing by 4 percent and 2 
percent, respectively. 
However, there were some signs of softness. A 
September survey of North Dakota and South Dakota 
retailers by the Minneapolis Fed showed generally softer 
sales over the previous two months compared with the 
same period a year earlier. Gross sales were softer this 
summer in Wisconsin and South Dakota compared with 
last year, and the total August handle at South Dakota 
casinos fell by about 3 percent.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. A biotech firm broke 
ground on a large research facility in Minnesota. A 
consultant noted a growing backlog of work related to 
merger and acquisition activity in the second half of the 
year. Freight rail contacts reported that shipments had 
grown slightly but consistently during this year. August 
shipments from Great Lakes ports increased from a year 
earlier; iron ore shipments increased 10 percent.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was flat since the last report. 
An industry database of construction spending showed 
no growth over the latter half of summer compared with 
a year earlier. Industry tracking of new construction 
projects showed lower levels over the most recent six-
week period (end of September) compared with a year 
earlier. A South Dakota contact said construction there 
was “a little slower” compared with last year, especially 
outside of metro areas. Limited figures on commercial 
construction permits in September showed activity was 
higher in Sioux Falls, S.D., but considerably lower in 
Billings, Mont. August permit figures were mixed. 
Residential construction was up modestly overall. 
Limited September data on residential construction 
showed activity was higher in Minneapolis-St. Paul and 
Billings compared with a year ago, but slightly lower in 
Sioux Falls. August permitting was generally flat to lower 
across the District compared with a year ago, with the 
notable exception of Minneapolis-St. Paul.  
Commercial real estate grew modestly since the last 
report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, office vacancies have 
risen slightly, while retail vacancies fell slightly after 
rising in previous quarters. Most metros continue to see 
multifamily development in light of low vacancy rates. 
Minneapolis-St. Paul maintained one of the tightest 
vacancy rates in the nation despite 5,000 units coming 
online in the past 12 months. Residential real estate 
slowed, with closed sales lower across the District. 
Thanks to low inventories, median prices were 
universally higher, including a 14 percent year-over-year 
increase in Bozeman, Mont. A contact there said real 
estate agents “are not seeing any slowdown in buying. 
They feel it’s only a matter of time before the markets 
slow, simply because of the lack of available inventory.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions produced by Creighton University indicated 
increased activity in September compared with a month 
earlier in Minnesota and North Dakota; the index for 
South Dakota indicated a slight decrease in activity. 
Several firms noted an increase in demand for 
equipment related to oil and gas extraction. A lubrication 
equipment producer reported an increase in orders from 
the military. A producer of hydraulic cylinders said sales 
were up over last year and current orders were solid.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions improved slightly since the 
previous report, but remained weak overall. Though 
drought conditions eased, large areas of Montana and 
the Dakotas remained exceptionally dry, and much of the 
damage to crops had already been done. Early 
indications were that the wheat harvest might be better 
than expected in these areas, but still well below 
average. Areas not affected by drought were generally 
expecting good yields, but saw harvests delayed by 
rains. Activity in the energy and mining sectors increased 
slightly since the last report. District oil and gas 
exploration as of late-September was roughly 
unchanged from a month earlier. Output at District iron 
ore mines was up substantially from a year earlier. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District continued to increase at a modest pace in September, and contacts in most sec-
tors expected gains in the coming months. Retail, restaurant, and tourism activity picked up since the last survey, but 
auto sales fell modestly. The manufacturing sector continued to increase moderately, and capital spending plans were 
positive. Contacts in the transportation and wholesale trade sectors noted a strong increase in sales, while professional 
and high-tech firms reported a modest rise in overall activity. Residential real estate activity was mostly flat, with steady 
home sales and construction activity. The Tenth District’s commercial real estate sector continued to expand modestly. 
Banking respondents reported steady overall loan demand, unchanged loan quality and credit standards, and stable 
deposit levels. Growth in energy activity in the Tenth District eased since the last survey period, and abundant supply in 
the natural gas sector continued to weigh on prices and profitability. The agricultural sector continued to soften in the 
District since the last survey.  
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours continued to 
rise at a slight pace in September, and contacts ex-
pected additional improvement in the months ahead. 
Respondents in the manufacturing, energy, wholesale 
trade, professional services, real estate, health services 
and restaurant sectors noted an increase in both em-
ployment and employee hours compared to the previous 
survey period, while respondents in the retail trade, auto 
sales, and tourism and hospitality sectors noted a de-
crease. Expectations for employment remained positive 
in all sectors except the auto sales and tourism sectors. 
The majority of respondents noted it was difficult to find 
qualified workers, and several contacts noted a shortage 
of commercial drivers, salespeople, and services work-
ers.  
Wages rose modestly in most sectors, and moderate 
wage growth was anticipated in the coming months.   
Prices  
Input prices rose modestly in most sectors compared to 
the previous survey period, while selling prices were 
either flat or slightly higher. In the retail sector, both input 
and selling prices increased slightly, but at a slower pace 
than in the prior survey. Restaurant contacts reported 
modest rises in input prices and steady selling prices, 
and expectations were for steady selling prices moving 
forward. Transportation input prices were up strongly, 
and transportation selling prices edged up. Prices in the 
construction sector rose moderately, with continued 
moderate increases anticipated in the coming months. 
Manufacturers reported modest rises in prices for fin-
ished goods, while raw material costs continued to edge 
higher. Manufacturers expected moderate growth in both 
finished goods and raw material prices in the next few 
months.  
Consumer Spending 
Overall consumer spending activity was mixed as retail 
sales, restaurant sales, and tourism activity increased, 
while auto sales fell further. Consumer spending was 
expected to increase slightly in the months ahead. Retail 
sales improved modestly in September and were similar 
to year-ago levels. Several retailers noted an increase in 
sales for upholstery and furniture items, while luxury 
products sold poorly. Contacts in the retail sector antici-
pated sales to rise moderately in the next few months, 
and inventory levels were expected to increase slightly. 
Auto sales continued to fall at a moderate pace and were 
below year-ago levels. Dealer contacts anticipated a 
further modest slowdown in sales moving forward, and 
auto inventories were expected to rise slightly. Restau-
rant sales increased slightly since the last survey, and 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
were well above year-ago levels. District tourism activity 
increased slightly, but remained lower than a year ago. 
Tourism contacts expected activity to improve further this 
fall.    
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moder-
ate pace in September, and the majority of other busi-
ness contacts reported moderate sales increases. Manu-
facturers reported sustained moderate growth in produc-
tion and shipments, particularly for chemicals, plastics, 
and machinery products. New orders and order backlogs 
grew at a modest pace, and activity was considerably 
higher than a year ago. Manufacturers’ capital spending 
plans remained favorable, and firms were increasingly 
optimistic about future activity.   
Outside of manufacturing, transportation and wholesale 
trade firms reported strong sales increases, while profes-
sional and high tech firms noted a more modest rise in 
activity. All firms expected sales to rise considerably in 
the next six months. Professional, high-tech, and whole-
sale trade firms reported strong capital spending plans, 
while transportation firms anticipated a slight decrease in 
capital expenditures heading forward.  
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity continued to rise at a slight 
pace as residential real estate conditions were flat and 
commercial real estate activity expanded modestly. 
Residential home sales were steady since the previous 
survey, and were moderately above year-ago levels. 
Sales of low- and medium-priced homes continued to 
outpace sales of higher-priced homes. Residential home 
prices increased modestly, while residential inventories 
decreased. Residential construction activity was flat, with 
no change in sales of construction supplies, new home 
starts, and traffic of potential home buyers. Activity in the 
commercial real estate sector continued to expand at a 
modest pace, as absorption, completions, construction 
underway, sales, and prices rose, while vacancy rates 
declined. Commercial real estate activity was expected 
to continue to increase at a modest pace in the coming 
months.    
 
 
 
 
 
Banking 
Bankers reported steady overall loan demand since the 
previous survey, with a majority of respondents indicat-
ing stable demand for commercial and industrial, com-
mercial real estate, residential real estate and consumer 
installment loans. Most bankers reported that loan quali-
ty was unchanged compared to a year ago, and ex-
pected loan quality to remain essentially the same over 
the next six months. Credit standards also remained 
largely unchanged in all major loan categories. Finally, a 
majority of respondents reported stable deposit levels.   
Energy 
Growth in Tenth District energy activity eased since the 
last survey period, while expectations for future activity 
remained solid. The number of active oil and gas drilling 
rigs was little changed across the District, and contacts 
expected them to stay near current levels in the coming 
months. Respondents projected a modest increase in 
future oil prices and hence higher profits over the next 
six months. The abundant supply of natural gas was 
expected to keep weighing on prices and profitability in 
that sector. Firms surveyed expected Hurricane Harvey 
to have low to medium impacts on the oil and gas indus-
try. Contacts, on average, estimated the effects on off-
shore production, trade, and refineries to last five, six 
and nine weeks, respectively, from the start of Harvey.  
Agriculture 
The District farm economy continued to soften, but 
showed some signs of stabilization since the previous 
reporting period. Farm income in the District was lower 
than a year ago, but some agricultural commodity prices 
rebounded slightly. Soybean prices increased modestly 
from the previous reporting period, and yield expecta-
tions remained strong. Wheat prices remained flat, but 
were higher than a year ago. Corn prices declined slight-
ly amid strong production expectations, but District con-
tacts expected strong crop yields to offset some weak-
ness in prices. Cattle and hog prices declined slightly 
from the previous reporting period, but also remained 
higher than a year ago. Farmland values declined mod-
estly in some regions, but generally remained steady in 
areas with strong crop production.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy continued to expand at a moderate pace over the past six weeks, and most contacts do 
not expect significant long-term disruption due to Hurricane Harvey. Manufacturing output strengthened, and activity in 
nonfinancial services increased. Retail sales growth continued to accelerate, with a surge in auto sales to replace vehi-
cles damaged by the hurricane. Homes sales weakened during the reporting period and prices were flat. Growth in the 
financial services and energy sectors continued but at a slower pace, and crop conditions remained mostly favorable. 
Employment, wages and prices increased, particularly in manufacturing. Outlooks remained positive overall. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose, and upward wage pressure 
persisted. Hiring picked up in manufacturing, continued 
at about the same modest pace in services, and abated 
slightly in the energy sector. Reports of labor shortages 
persisted, spanning most industries. Some manufactur-
ers said the difficulty finding workers was impeding their 
growth, and some services firms said it was driving up 
overtime costs. More than a quarter of firms expect that 
the impact of Hurricane Harvey will make finding and 
hiring workers more difficult over the next six months. In 
construction, builders were concerned that once post-
hurricane repair and rebuilding work begins, there likely 
will be skilled-worker shortages and increases in labor 
costs. Other contacts noted that they also pull from a 
labor pool that is likely to be in higher demand in the 
aftermath of the storm. 
Prices 
Selling prices increased at the same or faster pace over 
the past six weeks, and contacts noted upward pressure 
on input costs. Prices and costs rose at a faster clip in 
the manufacturing and energy sectors, while upward 
pressure was largely unchanged on the services side. 
New home prices were mostly flat, but there is continued 
pushback from buyers on pricing at the higher end. 
Some builders were offering discounts and/or incentives 
to entice buyers, particularly on inventory homes. Gaso-
line and diesel prices rose over the reporting period, as 
did oil prices. 
Manufacturing  
Robust expansion in the manufacturing sector continued, 
despite some disruption among Texas Gulf Coast pro-
ducers in the wake of Hurricane Harvey. Output growth 
picked up further for durable goods in September, led by 
increases in computer and electronic product manufac-
turing. Fabricated metals production rebounded, and 
output among energy-related firms overall continued to 
exhibit strength. Meanwhile, nondurable goods produc-
tion slowed. A majority of chemical producers noted 
production held steady or declined over the reporting 
period, with a number of executives saying Hurricane 
Harvey had a negative impact on logistics like transpor-
tation and availability of raw materials. Refinery capacity 
hampered by the storm was ramping back up quickly, 
with little damage to infrastructure. While it may take 
some time for supply chains to recover, the storm’s 
impact on the refining and petrochemical industry are 
projected to be transitory. For Texas manufacturing 
overall, outlooks were positive and more optimistic than 
during the prior reporting period. 
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Retail sales growth continued to accelerate despite 
Hurricane Harvey, according to firms surveyed three 
weeks after the storm. Nearly two-thirds of stores along 
the Texas Gulf Coast said they were negatively impacted 
by the hurricane, and on average those stores were shut 
down for about four days and experienced a reduction in 
revenue for about 10 days. Auto sales surged, partly due 
to increased demand for replacement vehicles after the 
storm. An auto dealer in Houston said sales were incred-
ibly strong, noting that several hundred thousand vehi-
cles had been flooded, and another dealer expects ele-
vated demand to last about six months. For the broader 
retail sector in Houston, rebuilding efforts were fueling a 
rise in retail sales and demand for warehouses in the 
area from building supply companies. Outlooks for busi-
ness in general were quite positive, an improvement 
from the mixed outlooks during the prior reporting period. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services continued to expand 
moderately over the past six weeks. There were some 
reports of Hurricane Harvey disrupting business, with 
those contacts noting the impact lasted one to two 
weeks on average. About a third of firms expect a net 
negative impact on revenues over the next six months 
from the storm, while nearly half expect no change on 
net and the balance anticipate an increase. Some staff-
ing services contacts have seen a rise in demand for 
accounting and data entry positions related to the hurri-
cane damages, as well as for call center employees and 
insurance adjusters. Staffing contacts generally think 
business activity will return to normal (pre-hurricane) by 
year’s end, and an oil and gas staffing firm noted that 
“things are close to normal again” in Houston already.  
Strength in the nonfinancial services sector was led by 
professional and technical services, with firms generally 
noting stronger revenue gains over the past six weeks, 
as well as transportation services. The healthcare indus-
try remained rather weak, with contacts saying they were 
continuing to struggle with lower demand and rising 
costs. Leisure and hospitality also exhibited weakness 
over the past six weeks, particularly along the Gulf Coast 
and Mexican border.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Overall, home sales weakened during the reporting 
period. However, contacts in Austin and Dallas–Fort 
Worth (DFW) noted continued strength in sales of low- to 
mid-priced homes. In Houston, storm damage to single-
family homes was reported to be much more extensive 
compared with other property types. Contacts expect 
new home starts and closings in Houston to be behind 
schedule for the remainder of the year.    
Apartment demand was generally disappointing in the 
third quarter, following a solid second quarter. Rent 
growth slowed and was below average in some large 
metros. In Houston, however, apartment leasing activity 
picked up, occupancy rose and rent concessions have 
diminished following Hurricane Harvey. The office mar-
ket was generally characterized as solid in DFW and 
San Antonio, but still weak in Houston. 
Financial Services 
Loan demand continued to increase over the past six 
weeks, albeit at a more sluggish pace than during the 
prior period. Growth was led by commercial real estate 
loans, where volumes continued to rise at a moderate 
pace. Volume growth abated for commercial and indus-
trial loans as well as for residential real estate loans, and 
consumer loan volumes declined slightly. Credit stand-
ards and terms tightened. Core deposit volumes grew 
again and net interest margins continued to increase. 
Outlooks in the financial sector remained optimistic.  
Energy 
Energy activity continued to expand, but at a slightly 
slower clip in the third quarter. Drilling activity in the 
Eagle Ford Shale and offshore has resumed normal 
operations after the hurricane. Overall growth in oil and 
gas production continued, but oilfield services firms 
noted weaker demand growth. Drilling activity is ex-
pected to decline slightly by the end of 2017, and de-
mand for oilfield services is softening outside of the 
Permian Basin. However, six-month outlooks for 2018 
were more optimistic relative to the last reporting period, 
and uncertainty has moderated. 
Agriculture 
Crop conditions remained favorable, although Hurricane 
Harvey hampered agriculture in the Coastal Plains. The 
extent of the impact is not yet known, but some livestock 
were lost and a small portion of the Texas cotton crop 
was damaged. Some rice and soybeans were also af-
fected, but likely minimally. Overall, grain production was 
strong, with particularly robust yields in Northeast Texas. 
There is good moisture for planting winter wheat, but 
while wheat prices are higher than a year ago they are 
still generally below breakeven levels. Agricultural pro-
ducers remain concerned about low crop prices, NAFTA 
negotiations, and the configuration of the next farm bill. ■ 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
August through September. Overall price inflation was flat and remained low, while upward wage pressures strength-
ened somewhat, and labor market conditions tightened further. Sales of retail goods picked up, and growth in consumer 
and business services remained strong. Conditions in the manufacturing sector improved, while activity in the agricul-
ture sector was flat. Contacts reported continued strong activity in residential real estate markets, and conditions in the 
commercial real estate sector remained solid. Lending activity grew at a moderate pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market tightened further. Wage 
gains increased in a few sectors. Increased competition 
for warehouse employees in the retail industry boosted 
wages. One contact at a major logistics and delivery 
company noted rising demand for manual labor, with 
these jobs increasingly being filled by workers wanting to 
supplement their income with additional part-time hours. 
Continued elevated demand for skilled IT professionals 
in the technology, financial services, and health-care 
industries supported strong wage growth. Shortages of 
health-care workers in Eastern Washington worsened. 
Labor shortages and increased unit labor costs in the 
agriculture sector fueled investments in automated tech-
nology. In the retail grocery industry, the continued shift 
of consumer preferences towards online purchases 
further reduced labor demand. 
Prices  
Overall, price inflation was flat and remained low during 
the reporting period. Stronger demand for manufactured 
steel products boosted price growth relative to the same 
period last year. In the restaurant industry, contacts 
reported that rising input costs pushed up final sales 
prices. Elevated inventory levels pushed down prices for 
some agricultural commodities. Economies of scale 
continued to put downward pressure on prices of cloud 
computing and data storage services. 
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales picked up over the reporting period. Contin-
ued improvement in economic conditions and favorable 
weather nudged up sales of beverage products. Sales in 
the retail grocery industry were unchanged from their 
solid pace in the previous period. Contacts in the indus-
try reported that online sales continued to more than 
offset declines at traditional brick-and-mortar outlets. 
One lender with a large national presence in the retail 
sector noted that same store sales at small merchants 
rebounded after slight declines following recent hurri-
canes. Growth in demand for legacy computing products 
slowed slightly to a moderate pace. Contacts expect 
these markets to experience a more modest growth 
environment in the future.  
Activity in consumer and business services generally 
grew at a strong pace. Accelerating investments in cloud 
computing and data analytics in the technology and 
financial services industries boosted sales at large tech-
nology companies. Additionally, demand for cybersecuri-
ty services is expected to be a major source of growth 
for the technology industry over the medium-term. Boost-
ed by e-commerce sales, transport volumes expanded at 
a robust pace. Contacts noted that improving economic 
conditions fueled demand for high-end shipping services 
in particular. Demand for entertainment services was 
strong, and one contact reported that technological gains 
and favorable tax conditions spurred investment. De-
The Beige Book ■ October 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
mand in the hospitality industry slowed slightly from its 
strong pace over the summer, and contacts expect hotel 
stays to soften a bit more over the remainder of the year. 
Restaurant sales declined in the late summer, due in 
part to less foot traffic at large retail centers. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, conditions in the manufacturing sector 
continued to improve. Production of semiconductors 
reached a 10-year high, driven primarily by demand for 
memory chips. Electricity usage by manufacturers in 
Eastern Washington picked up further. Deliveries of 
commercial aircraft dipped slightly, but new orders were 
up notably over the same period last year. Contacts 
expect strong overall demand for steel over the next few 
months as construction efforts in other parts of the coun-
try ramp up following recent hurricanes. Demand for 
manufactured steel products slowed from its moderate 
pace in the first half of the year as orders from automo-
bile manufacturers waned somewhat.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector was flat. Harvest yields 
of grains and potatoes were down slightly due to a wet 
spring, but overall quality was up. Demand for pork 
products dipped slightly, and profitability in the industry 
remained challenging. Reduced input prices boosted 
profitability in the feedlot industry. Contacts noted that 
foreign demand for some agricultural goods remained 
solid, and they did not expect exchange rate movements 
to slow exports. In the energy generation sector, capaci-
ty increases continued to outpace demand growth, a 
trend that contacts expect to persist as more states 
adopt renewable energy generation targets. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate market activity continued to grow at a strong 
pace. Residential construction activity remained robust 
throughout the District. However, disruptions from recent 
hurricanes exacerbated existing shortages of materials, 
somewhat slowing activity. Contacts in the Pacific North-
west reported construction delays of up to two months 
due to shortages of available land, labor, and materials. 
Strong demand for housing and continued low inventory 
levels pushed up prices further. Contacts in some metro-
politan areas noted that the lack of affordable housing 
slowed growth of existing home sales to a moderate 
pace. On balance, commercial construction activity 
continued to expand at a moderate pace. In Eastern 
Washington, permits for commercial construction were 
up over the same period last year. Contacts in Southern 
California reported that construction of hotel and retail 
spaces were at an all-time high. Contacts noted that 
interest rate increases have not substantially slowed 
demand for residential or commercial real estate. 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity continued to expand at a moderate pace 
over the reporting period. Overall loan demand remained 
moderate. One contact noted that demand from small- 
and medium-sized businesses slowed to a modest pace. 
Deposit growth inched up slightly. One contact in the 
Mountain West observed a slight uptick in deposit rates, 
indicating an increased demand for liquidity from lend-
ers. Overall credit quality remained strong. However, one 
contact noted a decline in credit quality in the agriculture 
industry, as continuing price declines hampered profita-
bility.■ 
 


