The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
November 27, 2019 
November 2019 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas based 
on information collected on or before November 18, 2019. This docu‐
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded modestly from October through mid-November, similar to the pace of growth seen over the 
prior reporting period. Most Districts reported stable to moderately growing consumer spending, and increases in auto 
sales and tourism were seen across several Districts. In manufacturing, more Districts reported an expansion in the 
current period than the previous one, though the majority continued to experience no growth. The picture for nonfinan-
cial services remained quite positive, with most Districts reporting modest to moderate growth. Transportation activity 
was rather mixed across Districts. Reports from the banking sector indicated continued but slightly slower growth in 
loan volumes. Home sales were mostly flat to up, and residential construction experienced more widespread growth 
compared to the prior report. Construction and leasing activity of nonresidential real estate continued to increase at a 
modest pace. Agricultural conditions were little changed overall, remaining strained by weather and low crop prices. 
Activity in the energy sector deteriorated modestly among reporting Districts. Outlooks generally remained positive, 
with some contacts expecting the current pace of growth to continue into next year.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment continued to rise slightly overall, even as labor markets remained tight across the U.S. Several Districts 
noted relatively strong job gains in professional and technical services as well as healthcare. Reports were mixed for 
employment in manufacturing, with some Districts noting rising headcounts while others noted stable employment 
levels and one District reported layoffs. There were scattered reports of labor reductions in retail and wholesale trade. 
The vast majority of Districts continued to note difficulty hiring driven by a lack of qualified applicants as the labor mar-
ket remained very tight. The shortage of workers spanned most industries and skill levels, and some contacts noted 
that their inability to fill vacancies was constraining business growth. Moderate wage growth continued across most 
Districts. Wage pressures intensified for low-skill positions.  
Prices 
Prices rose at a modest pace during the reporting period. Reports regarding input costs and selling prices in the manu-
facturing sector were mixed, with some Districts noting deceleration in prices, while others cited increased cost pres-
sures and a few indicated little to no change. Retailers mentioned higher costs, which contacts in some Districts at-
tributed to tariffs. Firms’ ability to raise prices to cover higher costs remained limited, though a few Districts noted that 
companies affected by the tariffs were more inclined to pass on cost increases. Service sector prices in reporting Dis-
tricts were mostly flat to up. Energy and steel prices were flat to down, while reports on construction materials and 
agricultural commodity prices were mixed. Overall, firms generally expected higher prices going forward. 
Boston 
Economic activity expanded at a modest to moderate 
pace as businesses and consumers headed into the 
fourth quarter. Prices were largely stable and hiring 
steady. Outlooks were mostly positive—an improvement 
since the last round.  
 
 
New York 
There was little or no growth in the regional economy. 
Employment was little changed, as job creation slowed, 
partly reflecting a shortage of available workers, while 
wage growth moderated. Input price decelerated, while 
selling prices continued to rise modestly. Service sector 
activity weakened, and real estate markets softened 
somewhat.  
 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
On balance, business activity continued at a modest 
pace of growth during the current Beige Book period. 
Labor markets tightened further throughout the District, 
accompanied by slowing employment growth and contin-
ued moderate wage growth. Price increases remained 
modest. Most firms expressed cautious optimism but 
continued uncertainty.  
Cleveland 
Fourth District economic activity increased modestly. 
Strength in professional and business services drove 
growth. Manufacturing improved slightly. Home and auto 
demand was up, though nondurable consumption was 
mixed. Employment grew slightly, driven by hiring in 
professional and business services. Wages rose mod-
estly overall. Selling prices increased modestly on bal-
ance.  
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy grew moderately. Manufactur-
ers saw a pick-up in shipments and new orders but con-
tinued to face constraints from tariffs and trade uncer-
tainties. Tourism remained strong while reports on retail 
sales were mixed. Financial and nonfinancial services 
experienced positive but mild growth. Labor demand 
strengthened while wage and price growth remained 
moderate, overall.  
Atlanta 
Economic conditions improved modestly. Tightness in 
the labor market persisted, and low-skill wage pressures 
increased. Nonlabor input costs rose. Retail sales and 
tourism activity were stable. Residential real estate 
activity improved, and commercial real estate activity 
was positive. Manufacturing activity accelerated further 
during the reporting period.  
Chicago 
Economic activity increased slightly. Employment, con-
sumer spending, and manufacturing all increased slight-
ly. Construction and real estate activity was little 
changed, while business spending decreased slightly. 
Wages and prices rose slightly and financial conditions 
improved modestly. More poor weather added to crop 
farmers’ difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have been mixed but relatively 
unchanged since our previous report. Contacts contin-
ued to note a heightened sense of economic uncertainty. 
Labor market conditions remained tight, and many firms 
reported raising wages and salaries to attract new work-
ers. The outlook among firms surveyed in mid-November 
was slightly pessimistic for the second consecutive 
quarter. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District activity grew at a modest pace. Employ-
ment grew slightly. Labor demand remained healthy, but 
some softness was evident, and labor supply remained 
tight nonetheless. Consumer spending rose, with in-
creases seen in airport traffic and vehicle sales. Manu-
facturing contracted, with reports of shrinking backlogs. 
Construction and real estate markets reported healthy 
activity. Oil drilling decreased slightly. 
Kansas City 
District economic activity was flat in October and early 
November. Consumer spending edged down as sales in 
the retail sector rose but fell in the auto, restaurant and 
tourism sectors. The professional and high-tech services 
and wholesale trade sectors reported rising sales, while 
transportation contacts noted a decline. Overall condi-
tions in the energy, agricultural and manufacturing sec-
tors remained weak.  
Dallas 
Economic activity continued to expand moderately. 
Growth remained solid in services and retail, and down-
shifted slightly in manufacturing. Home sales remained 
on the rise while energy activity continued to decline. 
Selling prices were largely flat, as firms’ ability to pass 
through cost increases remained limited. Hiring contin-
ued at a steady pace. Outlooks were generally improved, 
though uncertainty remained elevated. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded at a 
modest pace. The labor market remained tight, and 
wage growth was modest. Reports on price inflation 
were mixed. Sales of retail goods increased somewhat, 
and consumer and business services activity was solid. 
The pace of commerce in the manufacturing sector was 
little changed, and activity in the agriculture sector was 
mixed. Activity in residential and commercial real estate 
markets expanded moderately, and lending grew fur-
ther.   

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business contacts in the First District cited mostly positive results when contacted in November. Both retailers and 
manufacturers reported modest to moderate increases in revenues compared with a year earlier, as did staffing firms. 
Reports from commercial real estate contacts were similar to the last round, with the greatest strength in the Boston 
market, while activity in Hartford was steady at a low level. Residential real estate sales and prices were up in most 
areas. Labor markets remained tight and staffing firms noted some substantial pay increases. Most responding firms 
cited a positive outlook, with some noting a recent upgrade in their expectations. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets remained tight in the First District even as 
business contacts cited modest expansion of head-
counts in aggregate. Retail contacts reported having no 
problems hiring staff or having difficulty hiring only for 
selected positions. By contrast, several manufacturers 
noted that hiring was difficult and that labor costs had 
risen. At the same time, manufacturers reported no 
major positive revisions to hiring plans. Staffing respond-
ents saw strong demand for labor and continued to 
experience tight labor supplies, particularly of highly-
skilled workers. Most staffing contacts were able to 
increase bill rates and pay rates concurrently, ranging 
from 4 percent to 20 percent; one held both rates un-
changed from the last quarter. 
Prices  
Business contacts had little to say about prices. Retailers 
mentioned no pressures and most manufacturing con-
tacts reported no unusual pricing patterns. One excep-
tion was a dairy-products firm which reported raising 
their selling prices by 5 percent to recoup part of a 9 
percent increase in input costs.  
Consumer Spending 
Retailers consulted for this round reported posting year-
over-year comparable-store sales gains in the mid-single 
digits. Total revenue increases including expansion 
activity were in the high single digits or low double digits 
year-over-year. Sales expectations were optimistic for 
the holiday season and beyond. While the underlying 
trend in terms of economic fundamentals was reportedly 
strong, some contacts expressed concern about the 
impact of tariffs. One retailer reported that the intermedi-
ary firm that pays their import duties on some European 
luxury goods recently announced that the rates it charg-
es will be going up significantly. Two other firms have 
reported tariff impacts on sales, either in terms of pricing 
or in terms of supply chain disruptions slowing their 
product supply. 
Passenger traffic to Logan International was up 2.3 
percent for domestic travel and up 11.1 percent for inter-
national arrivals year-to-date through September com-
pared with a year earlier. Airlines have continued to add 
flights. The 2019 cruise ship season has ended with 
homeport passenger counts up 15 percent and port-of-
call passenger counts up 33 percent compared to the 
2018 season. Business and leisure travel were expected 
to remain robust into 2020.   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Reports from eight manufacturing contacts were more 
positive in this round than in the recent past. In some 
cases, contacts reported their first year-on-year sales 
growth since 2018. However, part of the improvement 
reflects a weak comparison period a year earlier: The 
first half of 2018 was strong, partly because of tax cuts, 
but tariffs and general trade uncertainty contributed to 
weakness in the second half of 2018. A notable area of 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
strength was semiconductors, which had been going 
through a down cycle that industry participants said was 
only partly attributable to global economic patterns; 
semiconductor industry cycles are often out-of-sync with 
the rest of the economy.  
Two contacts reported positive revisions to their capital 
expenditure plans. One is a manufacturer of veterinary 
supplies which said, among other things, that swine flu 
had led Chinese producers to increase production of 
chickens, requiring purchase of new veterinary technolo-
gies.  
Manufacturing respondents were positive about the near
-term future and half said they had made upward revi-
sions to their forecasts recently. Reasons varied. For a 
furniture maker, it was mostly a single large order from a 
new type of customer. For other firms, it was the trough 
in the semiconductor cycle. 
Staffing 
Most New England staffing firms reported positive reve-
nue growth in the third quarter of 2019, citing high single-
digit year-over-year increases. Some expect healthy 
growth in the last quarter of 2019 as well. Job candidates 
often do not possess the skillsets and experience de-
sired by employers, so staffing firms have augmented 
their training efforts. They have also increased their 
presence on online job boards and other advertising 
channels. A few respondents have expanded by hiring 
more recruiters and building specialized teams for re-
tained search services or permanent placements. All 
staffing contacts expressed optimism for additional gains 
in 2020.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District contin-
ued to strengthen into November. Office leasing demand 
in Boston has been robust even as leasing activity has 
slowed because of extremely low vacancy rates. Con-
struction activity was robust. The investment sales mar-
ket has also been strong; according to one contact, total 
transaction volume increased by 18 percent from Q3 
2018 to Q3 2019. The outlook for Boston was cautiously 
positive: All contacts reported that there were no signs of 
a growth slow-down and the commercial real estate 
market was well-balanced. However, one contact men-
tioned that they did not expect much price appreciation 
and had lowered their income expectations for the next 
five years.  
The Providence area saw moderate commercial market 
activity. Office rents were flat, while one-off transactions 
(not robust activity) lifted rents in the industrial market. 
Demand remained moderate in the investment sales 
market. One contact expressed concern about growing 
political uncertainty.  
In the greater Hartford area, commercial leasing activity 
levels have not changed since the last cycle. Absorption 
in the industrial market was low, and absorption in the 
office market was negative for 2019 to date. Retail stores 
continued to close. In the investment sales market, pric-
es were steady and the number of bidders in the market 
has fallen slightly. Commercial real estate respondents 
said business sentiment was neutral in Connecticut.   
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District saw 
improvements in September. (Most areas reported year-
over-year changes from September 2018 to September 
2019; New Hampshire reported October statistics and 
Vermont reported August data. Connecticut statistics 
were unavailable.) For single family homes, closed sales 
and median sales prices were up in five reporting areas. 
Inventory generally decreased. For condominiums, sales 
rose moderately in all reporting areas except Rhode 
Island. Median sales prices dropped slightly in Boston, 
but increased or stayed flat in all other areas. Condo 
inventory improved in Boston and Maine but decreased 
in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. 
Vermont experienced a slowdown in closed sales and an 
increase in prices in August (data for Vermont combine 
single family homes and condos). 
Contacts expected market activity to slow seasonally 
during the remainder of the year. The Maine and Massa-
chusetts respondents both noted that the market for 
homes priced below $250,000 is very tight. Contacts 
expressed positive outlooks for the coming months, 
citing favorable mortgage rates as the main reason.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional‐economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
There has been little or no growth in the Second District economy in the latest reporting period. The labor market re-
mained tight, with slowing hiring activity and wage growth. Input prices decelerated, while selling prices continued to rise 
at a modest pace. Manufacturing activity was essentially flat, while business in the transportation and distribution sec-
tors grew modestly. However, most service industries reported some softening in business conditions. Business con-
tacts remained fairly restrained in their optimism about the near-term outlook. Consumer spending was mixed, with 
strength in auto sales but ongoing weakness in traditional retail. Tourism has remained robust. Housing markets have 
been softer, on balance, though the residential rental market has held up fairly well. Commercial real estate markets 
have weakened, and new commercial construction has slowed. Finally, finance sector contacts generally reported sof-
tening conditions, though banks reported increased demand for mortgage loans.     
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight across the District, 
but hiring has slowed. Business contacts have continued 
to report trouble finding workers to fill a wide range of 
jobs such as software developers and engineers, ac-
countants, retail clerks, mechanical engineers, machin-
ists and welders. Two major employment agencies noted 
that almost all job candidates are already working, and 
that many are reluctant to switch jobs, particularly at this 
time in the year.    
Businesses overall continued to report little change in 
staffing levels, as job creation slowed. Contacts in manu-
facturing, education & health, and leisure & hospitality 
reported modest net hiring; however, finance, real es-
tate, and wholesale trade firms indicated modest de-
clines in employment, on balance. Looking ahead to the 
next six months, businesses in manufacturing and most 
service sectors still planned on adding to staff; however, 
businesses in the information, finance, and transporta-
tion sectors projected modest declines in employment. 
Businesses overall reported that wage growth has mod-
erated slightly in the latest reporting period, though 
contacts in leisure & hospitality and education & health 
reported more widespread increases.  
              
Prices  
Businesses in most sectors reported that input costs 
decelerated, while selling prices continued to rise at a 
modest pace. However, contacts in wholesale and retail 
trade have continued to note more widespread escala-
tion in the prices they pay. Contacts in the leisure & 
hospitality sector, however, have continued to report 
steady to declining prices. Prices for Broadway theater 
tickets, for example, have edged down and are slightly 
lower than a year ago. Looking ahead, there was not 
much of a change in businesses’ inclination to raise 
prices in the months ahead.    
Consumer Spending 
Retailers report that sales have been steady to softer 
since the last report and were lukewarm in their expecta-
tions for the near-term outlook. A number of retail con-
tacts expressed concern about the general business 
climate, and a sizable number have scaled back capital 
spending plans. Upstate New York retailers noted some 
pickup in shopper traffic and sales activity, reflecting 
heavier and earlier sales promotion, but note that the 
pace of growth remains modest. Most stores indicated 
that inventories were in good shape heading into the 
holiday season.   
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Sales of both new and used vehicles have remained 
solid in recent weeks, running above year-earlier levels, 
according to dealers in upstate New York. Dealers indi-
cated that manufacturer incentives and year-end 
changeovers have boosted sales. Consumer credit 
conditions have remained in good shape.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has re-
mained flat. On the distribution side, wholesalers noted a 
significant rebound in activity, while transportation con-
tacts said that activity grew modestly.   
Looking ahead, manufacturers, wholesalers, and trans-
portation firms indicated that they anticipate modest 
growth in the months ahead, on balance. Contacts in all 
these sectors have expressed ongoing concern about 
tariffs, trade tensions, and related uncertainty, as well as 
the rising minimum wage in New York.   
Services 
Businesses across almost all service industries reported 
some weakening in activity, on balance, since the last 
report. A notable exception has been in the leisure & 
hospitality sector, where contacts noted moderate 
growth in activity. Broadway theaters reported that at-
tendance was fairly sturdy in October but dropped off a 
bit in the first half of November, as both attendance and 
revenues slipped below comparable year-ago levels.    
Other service industries generally reported softening 
activity—particularly in the information and finance sec-
tors. Professional & business and education & health 
service firms reported some modest weakening in condi-
tions.  Service firms, even those in leisure & hospitality, 
have grown somewhat less optimistic about the near-
term outlook.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, weaker in the latest reporting period.  
Prices of New York City condos and co-ops have contin-
ued to trend lower and are now running moderately 
below comparable 2018 levels, with steeper declines at 
the high end of the market and in Manhattan. A local real 
estate expert noted a precipitous drop in the share of 
cash purchases at the higher end of the market, which is 
seen as a signal that investors have largely left the mar-
ket. The inventory of existing homes has continued to 
climb to a fairly high level in Manhattan but less so in the 
outer boroughs. Housing markets in the suburban areas 
around New York have been more stable, with prices still 
rising moderately in most areas and inventories general-
ly stable. Similarly, in upstate New York, the sales mar-
ket has remained strong, with inventories steady at very 
low levels, prices still rising, and bidding wars still fairly 
commonplace in the more sought-after areas.   
The residential rental market has strengthened further. 
While Manhattan rents have leveled off, rents across 
much of the city and metro area have continued to rise at 
a moderate pace—and at a somewhat faster pace at the 
high end of the market, reflecting a shift in demand away 
from owning. Rental vacancy rates have edged up but 
remain quite low across New York City.  
Commercial real estate markets across the District have 
generally weakened in the latest reporting period. Office 
rents have been mostly flat, while availability rates have 
climbed modestly in most areas, with leasing activity 
steady to slower. Industrial markets have been mixed: 
rents have continued to trend up, though the pace has 
slowed, and availability rates have been flat to up slight-
ly. The market for retail space has weakened further, 
even as the holiday shopping season draws near, with 
rents flat and vacancy rates at multi-year highs. 
New multi-family construction starts have held steady 
across the District, while the volume of ongoing multi-
family construction has remained fairly brisk. New office 
and industrial construction has continued to weaken 
modestly.    
Banking and Finance 
Financial sector contacts generally reported softer busi-
ness conditions and expressed concern about a deterio-
rating business climate. Bankers reported higher de-
mand for residential and commercial mortgages, but 
unchanged demand for consumer and C&I loans.  Credit 
standards were said to be unchanged across all major 
categories. Loan spreads narrowed on all categories. 
Contacts also reported further decreases in average 
deposit rates. Finally, bankers reported stable delinquen-
cy rates across all loan categories. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate Third District business activity continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book period. 
Growth rates slowed from the prior period to a modest pace in manufacturing and nonauto retail sales, and to a slight 
pace for tourism. Financial services continued to grow at a moderate pace; nonfinancial services grew at a modest 
pace. Construction activity for residential and nonresidential buildings continued to hold steady, as did commercial 
leasing activity. Sales of new autos and of existing homes continued to decline – at a slight and a moderate pace, re-
spectively. Labor markets tightened further throughout the District. Wages continued growing moderately, but employ-
ment growth appeared to slow to a slight pace. Overall, price pressures remained modest. The firms’ outlook for growth 
over the next six months remained positive, with about half of all firms anticipating increases in general activity. Most 
contacts expected current business conditions to continue through 2020 but remained cautious in their planning. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment grew slightly during the current Beige Book 
period – a slower pace than in the prior period. About 
two-thirds of the firms reported no change in staff. While 
the share of manufacturers reporting a higher number of 
employees rose, the share among the much larger non-
manufacturing sectors fell. Average work hours contin-
ued to edge down since the prior period.  
The firms continued to report very tight labor market 
conditions. Staffing firm contacts all noted challenges to 
hiring, as the labor shortages continued to constrain 
placements. One staffing contact also reported that order 
activity was down; another noted that orders had been 
delayed, after which clients were trying to catch up with 
production – necessitating added incentives to attract 
workers for overtime. Another staffing firm noted pres-
sure from a client seeking contract concessions in order 
to absorb some of the cost of tariffs on the firm’s prod-
ucts.  
Wage growth continued at a moderate pace. While the 
overall pressure appears to have eased slightly, contacts 
noted specific pressures at lower wage rates. One staff-
ing firm reported more difficulty recruiting for firms that 
only offered minimum wage, and another indicated that a 
different staffing firm was deploying yard signs to recruit 
for jobs paying $16 an hour. The share of nonmanufac-
turing contacts who reported increases in wage and 
benefit costs ticked up to 44 percent; just 2 percent 
reported decreases. 
Prices  
On balance, the firms continued to report modest in-
creases for both input prices and prices received for their 
own goods and services. The share of firms reporting 
increases in prices fell for both manufacturing and non-
manufacturing firms; generally, the share reporting de-
creases in prices rose. About two-thirds of the firms 
reported no change in prices over the period.  
Looking ahead six months, the anticipation of higher 
prices was less widespread among manufacturers than 
last period. The percentage of manufacturing firms that 
expect higher prices fell, while the percentage expecting 
lower prices rose. This was true for prices firms expected 
to pay as well as for prices firms expected to receive for 
their own goods.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturers reported modest growth in 
activity – somewhat slower than the moderate pace 
reported during the prior period. Nearly twice as many 
firms reported increases in shipments and new orders 
than reported decreases; however, the percentage re-
porting increases rose to about one-fifth of all firms that 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
reported.  
The growth was broadly shared, as the makers of lumber 
products, paper products, chemicals, primary metal 
products, fabricated metal products, and industrial ma-
chinery all tended to note gains in new orders and ship-
ments.  
Comments were mixed. A couple of primary metals firms 
reported positive trends, but the firms from several other 
sectors noted weakening orders, competitive business 
lost as a consequence of tariffs, and production con-
straints for lack of labor.  
Manufacturers’ expectations of activity over the next six 
months were mostly unchanged. Expectations of ship-
ments and of new orders edged higher, remaining above 
long-term nonrecession averages. Expectations of future 
employment fell, while planned capital spending rose.  
Consumer Spending 
Contacts for malls and convenience stores reported 
modest growth in nonauto retail sales – a return from the 
somewhat faster pace during the prior period. Mall store 
operators reported solid year-over-year sales growth. 
Convenience store contacts suspected a little economic 
softness underlying a slight tick down in their positive 
rate of sales growth, although weather may have also 
been a factor.  
Auto sales continued to edge lower but remained near 
high levels. Pennsylvania dealers noted positive year-
over-year sales in October, while New Jersey dealers 
reported slight growth in October following a weak Sep-
tember. Year-over-year sales growth through October 
year to date remained positive in both states, holding 
steady in Pennsylvania but flattening out slightly in New 
Jersey.  
Tourism activity appeared to grow at a slight pace – a bit 
slower than in the prior period. A tourism analyst noted 
that demand for hotels in downtown Philadelphia re-
mained positive but slowed on a year-over-year basis, 
similar to national trends. Atlantic City casino revenues 
slowed from the prior period and were down slightly, on 
balance.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, activity at service-sector firms continued at 
a modest pace of growth. The percentage of firms re-
porting increases in new orders nearly doubled, and the 
share of firms reporting increases in current revenues 
edged higher. Over 55 percent of the firms – more than 
in the prior period – expect growth over the next six 
months. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report moderate growth in 
overall loan volumes (excluding credit cards) on a year-
over-year basis, although the rate seemed to edge 
slightly slower. Credit card lending held steady at a 
moderate pace.  
During the current period (reported without seasonal 
adjustments), volumes appeared to grow moderately for 
home mortgages, modestly for automobile loans, and 
slightly for other consumer loans (not elsewhere classi-
fied). Commercial real estate and commercial and indus-
trial loan volumes declined slightly, while home equity 
lines decreased moderately.  
Banking contacts continued to report no significant prob-
lems with loan delinquencies. Contacts also noted ongo-
ing uncertainty that is slowing business decision-making 
and constraining the willingness to invest. However, 
most banking contacts remain cautiously optimistic about 
continued growth through 2020.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported little change in contract signings 
in the current period, on balance. One South Jersey 
builder reported two strong months of sales in the active 
adult market, noting positive feelings about the coming 
year but a plan to be conservative.  
Existing home sales continued to decline moderately on 
a year-over-year basis across most local markets, with 
exceptions of moderate growth in the Jersey Shore and 
Harrisburg areas. A large Philadelphia-area broker indi-
cated continued inventory constraints heading into a 
seasonal lull for home sales.  
On balance, commercial real estate construction and 
leasing activity seemed to hold steady at relatively high 
levels. Contacts reported continued strength in the in-
dustrial market, with ongoing demand for new construc-
tion. Most contacts also noted a positive quarter for 
office space leasing, which may spur demand for new 
construction in the future. Management firms continued 
to note positive net absorption, falling vacancy rates, and 
rising rents in many office and industrial segments. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research‐and‐data/regional‐
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Overall economic activity in the Fourth District increased modestly, an improvement after a couple periods of little 
growth. Professional and business services contacts continued to see strong and increasing activity. Manufacturers 
reported slight demand growth for the first time in several months, noting that while their international sales remained 
weak, domestic demand was stronger than they had predicted. Homebuilders indicated that low mortgage rates and 
rising wages boosted demand for new homes. Auto sales were bolstered by higher incentives, while reports from non-
auto retailers were mixed. Bankers noted growing loan demand for homes and autos. Nonresidential contractors report-
ed that demand ticked up. By contrast, the freight sector saw further weakening. Contacts in many sectors were optimis-
tic about near-term growth prospects. Employment rose slightly on balance, largely on the strength of professional and 
business services hiring, while overall wage growth was modest. Output price inflation was modest on balance. 
Employment and Wages  
Aggregate employment increased slightly over the peri-
od. Professional and business services firms continued 
to staff up to meet demand growth, accounting for most 
of the net employment gains. Construction contractors 
indicated that typical winter layoffs had been delayed this 
year. Nonseasonal retail staffing levels were stable. Most 
bankers held employment levels steady, but one large 
bank implemented layoffs, saying interest rate reductions 
had put pressure on margins. Most manufacturers had 
stable staffing, but a couple steel manufacturers cut 
temporary workers and reduced hours for permanent 
employees. Long-haul trucking and rail companies re-
duced staffing levels because of softening demand. 
Wages rose modestly overall. Manufacturers increased 
wages and offered retention bonuses to compete for 
talent. Retailers across subsectors raised pay rates, 
citing tighter labor markets. While professional and busi-
ness services firms reported only slight wage pressure, 
other white-collar industries, including banking and real 
estate, saw stronger wage pressure. One community 
banker said he needed to raise wages 10 percent to 
attract qualified talent. Construction pay was mostly 
unchanged. Freight firms reported little pressure to raise 
wages. 
Prices  
Selling prices in the District rose modestly on balance. 
Much of the price inflation came from services firms; 
nonsteel manufacturers’ prices were stable, and retail 
inflation was mixed. Some professional and business 
services firms negotiated modest price increases. A 
staffing contact remarked, “we have good pricing power 
due to [strong] demand with inadequate supply." Com-
mercial real estate companies increased rates in re-
sponse to rising labor costs. Local delivery and rail 
freight companies raised rates, while long-haul trucking 
rates were flat to down. Manufacturers’ selling prices 
were stable, except in the case of steel producers, 
whose prices fell with the market. Though tariffs pushed 
up costs for some manufacturers, manufacturers’ materi-
als costs decreased on balance, especially for steel. On 
the consumer side, a clothing retailer reduced the use of 
price discounting to offset higher costs resulting from 
tariffs. By contrast, a food retailer said that while tariffs 
had increased costs, the company “cannot raise prices 
on a whim” because of fierce competition. Homebuilders 
reported rising costs; some increased prices to offset 
these costs, while others took hits to their margins to 
maintain market share. 
 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported slightly higher sales compared to 
those of the previous report. Light-vehicle sales were 
solid and increasing. One dealer noted that new-vehicle 
sales in October were bolstered by a 7 percent increase 
in manufacturer incentives relative to last year’s. Con-
tacts in hospitality and retail apparel reported mixed 
activity throughout the Fourth District. While overall sales 
were up only slightly this period, retailers were optimistic 
about sales in the coming months, looking forward to a 
boost from the holiday shopping season. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported a slight increase in activity, 
although overall conditions remained relatively soft. 
Domestic demand held up better than manufacturers 
had anticipated. However, several contacts said interna-
tional weakness still weighed on demand, especially 
softness in western and central Europe and the ongoing 
negative impacts from trade tensions with China. One 
steel producer noted that declines in steel prices pushed 
up demand as customers negotiated contracts for 2020 
in an effort to lock in low prices, while another said that a 
falling price environment encouraged customers to hold 
lower inventory and buy on an as-needed basis. Aside 
from the usual holiday slowdown, manufacturers were 
relatively optimistic that conditions would continue to 
improve in the coming months, and several noted that 
they were working on plans for increased capital invest-
ment for 2020. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Construction contacts reported strengthening demand, 
while real estate firms indicated that demand was flat. 
Nonresidential contractors noted slight demand growth 
over the period because they acquired new projects from 
a wide range of industry segments. Nonresidential con-
tractors were upbeat about the near future as well, be-
lieving there will be plenty of projects to bid on in 2020. 
However, commercial real estate contacts reported flat 
demand. A couple commercial real estate contacts said 
softening global markets and trade tensions weighed on 
demand. 
On the residential side, homebuilders indicated that 
demand increased modestly, citing low mortgage rates 
and wage growth as contributing factors. One home-
builder also suggested that stronger demand for resale 
homes allowed potential buyers to trade up to new 
homes more easily. However, residential real estate 
agents characterized sales of existing homes as un-
changed. Homebuilders expected continued demand 
growth, apart from the expected winter slowdown, while 
realtors expected home demand to remain unchanged. 
Financial Services 
On balance, demand for credit increased slightly. A large 
minority of bankers reported that demand for credit had 
increased, while the rest suggested that it was steady. In 
particular, contacts indicated that lower interest rates 
drove increases in home lending—particularly for mort-
gage refinancing—and vehicle loans. However, one 
contact indicated that demand from small businesses 
and large commercial clients weakened. Although bank-
ers indicated that falling interest rates may erode core 
deposits going forward, deposit balances have remained 
relatively stable to date. 
Professional and Business Services 
Activity in the professional and business services sector 
has strengthened further since the previous report. Con-
tacts from a variety of subsectors continued to report 
strong demand for business services and suggested that 
their clients were investing in growth through activities 
such as marketing and mergers and acquisitions. One 
business development contact reported a considerable 
increase in activity in recent weeks because of a number 
of businesses that are opening new locations in the area. 
Overall, the majority of contacts in professional and 
business services expect favorable conditions to contin-
ue into the near future.  
Freight 
Freight sector conditions have weakened further since 
the last report. The majority of contacts reported no 
change or lower demand for freight services, although 
one freight firm reported that September and October 
were its strongest months since January. Ongoing weak-
ness in the manufacturing sector was a major factor 
contributing to recent softening; one contact noted de-
mand weakness because manufacturing output from 
Mexico had fallen significantly. Another contact re-
marked that economic uncertainty caused businesses to 
hold off on investment purchases, resulting in lower 
shipping volumes. Finally, contacts pointed to excess 
capacity in trucking as exacerbating weaknesses. Over-
all, freight contacts have downgraded their near-term 
outlook since the previous report, from solid to mixed.  ■ 
 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy grew moderately since our previous Beige Book. A majority of manufacturers reported growth 
in shipments and new orders, although tariffs and trade uncertainty were concerns for many producers. Overall, import 
volumes continued to exceed export volumes; however, growth in exports outpaced growth in imports in recent weeks. 
Meanwhile, trucking companies reported a decline in rates as demand softened to a moderate rate. Some retailers re-
ported  strong sales, although some high end retailers lost sales to customers who sought less expensive alternatives. 
Travel and tourism strengthened across most of the Fifth District. Home sales and mortgage lending picked up in recent 
weeks, according to real estate agents and lenders. On the commercial side, real estate leasing, sales, and construction 
grew at a modest to moderate pace with the exception of retail leasing, which slowed in several markets. Nonfinancial 
services firms reported mild growth, overall, and expected slow growth to continue heading into 2020. Executives noted a 
slowdown in the oil and gas industry. Farmers have been hesitant to invest in land or equipment. Labor demand strength-
ened while wage increases were moderate, overall. Price growth also remained moderate in recent weeks.      
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor strengthened moderately in re-
cent weeks. Employment agencies reported a seasonal 
pick-up in new job openings and an increase in direct 
hire recruitment services, rather than temporary, for 
larger clients. Employers continued to report difficulties 
finding qualified workers. A few firms sought to fill job 
openings with in-house training programs, apprentice-
ship programs, or partnerships with educational institu-
tions. Wages increased moderately, overall. Meanwhile, 
staffing agencies reported increased wage pressures 
for jobs in the lower pay scales.         
Prices  
Price growth remained moderate since our previous 
report. According to manufacturing and service sector 
firms, growth of prices paid continued to exceed growth 
in prices received. Rising labor costs, including wages 
and employer-paid health insurance, were noted as 
contributors to the increase in prices paid. Meanwhile, 
raw materials prices were reportedly up for some con-
struction materials and tariffed goods while price de-
clines were cited for freight transportation, energy, food 
commodities, chemicals, and steel.  
  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing in the Fifth District grew moderately since 
our last report. Contacts reported increases in shipments 
and new orders, overall, as strong demand supported 
continued growth for many manufacturers. However, 
tariffs and trade continued to be concerns since tariffs 
led to higher costs of raw materials and lower profit 
margins. Trade-related uncertainty remained significant. 
Lower profitability caused some companies to decrease 
production levels and staff headcounts. Meanwhile, 
some manufacturers struggled on the demand side, such 
as a Virginia yarn manufacturer, who reported that eco-
nomic uncertainty is hurting demand by leading some 
customers to reduce inventory levels.        
Ports and Transportation 
Ports in the Fifth District saw modest growth, overall. 
Import volumes continued to exceed export volumes, but 
several contacts noted that export volumes were growing 
faster than import volumes. On the export side, growth 
was particularly strong in chemicals, plastics, and meat. 
However, some ports saw softness in autos, on both the 
import and export side. Firms continued to express con-
cerns about trade with China but were able to divert 
some trade through other East Asian countries.  
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Meanwhile, an airport executive saw a drop in cargo to 
and from Europe and looked to expand business in 
other parts of the world. 
Fifth District trucking companies reported moderate 
demand in recent weeks. Executives saw steady busi-
ness with established customers but softening rates, 
lower revenues, and less demand than a year ago.  
Some small trucking companies that had opened to 
meet high demand in recent years went out of business, 
easing pressures on driver availability and wages. Exec-
utives differed in their views about the future. For exam-
ple, a North Carolina trucking firm planned to expand its 
fleet of tractors and drivers in 2020, but another compa-
ny stopped filling open positions because of low reve-
nues and high costs.    
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Travel and tourism in the Fifth District were generally 
strong in recent weeks. Hotels and resorts had higher 
occupancy and moderate rate increases. Restaurants 
around the Fifth District also had steady demand, alt-
hough some had to cut services or hours because of 
difficulty finding employees. In Charleston, South Caroli-
na, tourism recovered well after Hurricane Dorian, but 
attractions in the District of Columbia noted some soft-
ness. Contacts noted that low gas prices gave people 
incentive to travel but expressed concerns that ongoing 
delays in operationalizing new aircraft could hamper 
growth. 
Fifth District retailers experienced varied conditions 
since our last report. Some reported strong sales, and 
one even planned to expand by opening new stores. 
However, hardware stores saw softening demand, as 
did high-end clothing stores, who attributed weakness to 
customers looking for cheaper alternatives. Several 
retailers reported that tariffs were raising costs and 
hurting profit margins. In Virginia, a home goods store 
discontinued several items, particularly small electronic 
devices, as a result of tariff-related cost increases.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales increased moderately in recent weeks. Real 
estate agents indicated that inventories of single-family 
homes were little changed as new listings continued to 
sell quickly and buyer traffic was steady at open houses 
and showings. Meanwhile, new home sales and con-
struction were steady, although construction of lower 
priced homes remained limited. Overall, agents reported 
modest growth in home prices. 
Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately in re-
cent weeks. Brokers continued to reported strong de-
mand for industrial space and office leasing increased 
modestly in some markets. Retail leasing, however, 
slowed across markets and vacancy rates increased 
slightly. Meanwhile, rental rates were reportedly stable to 
increasing modestly. Commercial sales and construction 
increased modestly in some regions. Multifamily leasing 
remained healthy in most markets, while multifamily 
construction remained steady.   
Banking and Finance 
On the whole, loan demand picked up modestly since 
our previous report. Residential mortgage demand was 
generally described as stable to increasing modestly. 
Some banks noted that low interest rates helped to 
increase loan demand, but net interest margins were 
compressed. Bankers also noted an increase in mort-
gage refinancing. Commercial real estate loan demand 
and business lending strengthened modestly while auto-
motive lending was flat, on balance. Deposits grew mod-
erately since our last report. Bankers continued to report 
vigorous competition for loans and deposits. Measures 
of credit quality remained stable at high levels through-
out the Fifth District.    
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, nonfinancial services firms reported slight 
growth in demand in recent weeks. Hospitals and health 
care providers continued to experience solid growth. A 
records management firm, on the other hand, saw softer 
federal government spending in recent weeks. Advertis-
ing and marketing firms were generally positive, although 
one marketing executive believed that the outlook in his 
industry had shifted from optimistic to cautiously optimis-
tic or “a little nervous”. Several firms indicated that chal-
lenges finding qualified workers and general economic 
uncertainty were constraining growth and leading to 
expectations for slower growth heading into 2020.  
Natural Resources 
Comments on the natural resources sector were some-
what pessimistic. One contact noted a slowdown in oil 
and gas drilling and was concerned about bankruptcies 
in the coal industry. Meanwhile, farmers were reportedly 
hesitant to invest in land or equipment because of unsta-
ble commodity prices, limited labor availability, tariffs, 
and their income being tied to government subsidies 
such as disaster and trade relief funds. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity expanded modestly since the previous report, and the 
outlook among contacts remained positive. Tightness in the labor market continued to constrain growth in many sectors. 
Contacts noted that wage pressures continued to increase for lower-skilled positions. Firms continued to report rising 
nonlabor costs, and businesses affected by tariffs indicated they were likely to pass along cost increases to customers. 
Retail sales levels and automobile sales remained steady from October through mid-November. Tourism activity im-
proved since the last report. Residential real estate markets showed signs of improvement, and commercial real estate 
activity was steady. Manufacturing activity accelerated, and new orders and production levels rose over the reporting 
period. District bankers noted that financial conditions remained healthy, though the pace of loan growth slowed slightly. 
Employment and Wages  
Firms continued to report that staffing levels were in line 
with projections of flat to slightly higher growth in payrolls 
compared with the prior year. As reported last period, 
exceptions were in retail, trade, and logistics, where 
labor force reductions were noted. Contacts in various 
geographies and industry segments continued to cite 
labor market tightness as constraining growth. Conse-
quently, firms continued to pursue automation of certain 
operational processes. Attracting and retaining talent 
remained another labor market challenge, as employers 
continued to explore innovative recruiting and retention 
tactics.  
Annual wage increases, on average, remained in the 3-4 
percent range; however, contacts reported that wage 
pressures continued to build for lower-skill positions. 
Prices  
Overall, reports from firms continued to indicate increas-
ing nonlabor costs, albeit at a pace in line with expecta-
tions. While some businesses noted pricing power, there 
were accounts of some firms considering alternatives to 
raising prices in order to maintain margins and offset 
increases. However, firms most affected by tariffs indi-
cated they were more likely to pass along cost increases 
to customers. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Ex-
pectations survey showed year-over-year unit costs were  
up 1.7 percent in October. Survey respondents indicated 
they expect unit costs to rise 1.8 percent over the next 
twelve months. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Retailers noted that consumer spending remained strong 
and retail sales levels were steady since the last report. 
Contacts anticipate a healthy holiday season with online 
sales growth expected to again outpace brick and mortar 
sales. Automotive sales were unchanged from the previ-
ous report. 
Tourism and hospitality contacts indicated a higher level 
of uncertainty from a year ago; however, overall busi-
ness sentiment remains positive for the balance of the 
year and into 2020. Overall, tourism activity for the Dis-
trict remained healthy since the last report. Monthly 
Mississippi casino gross revenues were up for the first 
nine months of the year compared with the same time 
frame in 2018. 
Construction and Real Estate 
This year’s gradual decline in mortgage rates helped 
boost demand for housing throughout the District. Home 
sales showed signs of improvement and home prices 
appreciated. Supply remained a challenge, however, as 
for-sale inventory levels in many markets has not kept up 
with demand. Declining supply of developed lots for new 
construction and relatively higher construction costs 
remained an impediment to improving housing starts. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Although lower mortgage rates made housing more 
affordable, rising home prices and limited supply contin-
ued to be a challenge for home buyers looking to pur-
chase in many markets throughout the District. 
Commercial real estate (CRE) leasing and sales activity 
generally remained positive and steady across most 
District markets and property sectors during the reporting 
period. Overall, most CRE sectors experienced positive 
dynamics as rents continued to grow and vacancy trends 
remained stable or declined at a modest pace. Industry 
contacts reported continued strength in the multifamily, 
industrial, hospitality and office sectors. The pace of 
CRE project construction activity remained healthy. 
Contacts reported that capital was readily available for 
most CRE projects via banks and non-bank entities and 
that lending competition appeared to be accelerating.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers indicated that overall business activity 
accelerated slightly since the last report. New orders and 
production levels rose, while finished inventories re-
mained relatively flat. Purchasing managers reported 
that wait times for supply deliveries were slightly longer. 
Optimism for future production among manufacturing 
contacts decreased, with only one-fifth of contacts ex-
pecting higher levels of production over the next six 
months, compared to one-third in the last reporting peri-
od. Contacts continued to mention trade policy as a 
potential downside risk to their outlook. 
Transportation 
District transportation firms cited varying levels of activity 
over the reporting period. Freight forwarders saw strong 
growth in package volume and revenue. Port contacts 
reported increased freight activity, and some noted rec-
ord year-over-year increases in container volumes. 
However, some slowing in breakbulk cargos, such as 
imported steel, plywood, and non-ferrous metals, primar-
ily due to tariffs, was noted. Inland barge companies 
reported an increase in demand from year-earlier levels. 
Railroads saw significant declines in shipments of food 
products (excluding grain), primary metal products, iron 
and steel scrap, and coal, which were partially offset by 
increases in coke and metallic ores; intermodal ship-
ments continued to decline by near double digits. The 
majority of contacts expect activity over the next year to 
be flat to slightly up. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions cooled slightly but 
remained healthy. Bankers indicated that loan growth 
continued, though at a slower pace, particularly for con-
sumer loans and commercial real estate. While there 
was a slight increase in nonperforming assets, values 
were still near historic lows. Slower loan growth and 
increased payoffs added to margin pressures for finan-
cial institutions. 
Energy  
Chemical and petrochemical manufacturers described a 
slight softening in production related to slowing global 
economic conditions. However, capital investment and 
hiring is expected to pick up in the near term as facility 
expansion plans move forward. While demand for pipe-
line infrastructure persisted, some energy contacts men-
tioned that new pipeline construction was fraught with 
challenges and cost overruns. Utilities contacts reported 
slowing momentum among certain industrial and com-
mercial segments, although their Southeast outlook was 
positive and capital investment budgets expanded year-
over-year. Renewables sales and production activity 
remained strong as adoption, especially wind and solar, 
accelerated. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained mixed. Reports indicat-
ed parts of the District, particularly in Georgia but also in 
large parts of Alabama, the Florida panhandle, and 
Tennessee, experienced drought-conditions ranging 
from abnormally dry to extreme drought. The November 
forecast for Florida’s orange and grapefruit crops was 
unchanged from last month but ahead of last year’s 
production. On a year-over-year basis, prices paid to 
farmers in September were up for corn but down for 
cotton, rice, soybeans, beef, broilers, and eggs. Howev-
er, on a month-over-month basis, prices increased for 
cotton, rice, and soybeans but declined for corn, beef, 
broilers and eggs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased slightly overall in October and early November, and contacts ex-
pected growth to continue at a similar pace over the next 12 months. Employment, consumer spending, and manufac-
turing all increased slightly. Construction and real estate activity was little changed, while business spending decreased 
slightly. Wages and prices rose slightly and financial conditions improved modestly. More poor weather added to crop 
farmers’ difficulties. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased slightly over the reporting period, 
though contacts expected a somewhat faster rate of 
growth over the next 12 months. Hiring continued to be 
focused on professional and technical, sales, and pro-
duction workers. As they have for some time, contacts 
indicated that the labor market was tight and that it was 
difficult to fill positions at all skill levels. Multiple contacts 
reported bringing back retired workers as a way to fill 
openings. Manufacturers facing slow demand again 
reported cutting hours rather than laying off workers 
because they were worried the tight labor market would 
make it too difficult to hire when demand recovered. A 
staffing firm reported a slight decrease in billable hours 
due to lower demand from manufacturers. Wages in-
creased slightly overall; contacts were most likely to 
report increases for managerial, professional and tech-
nical, and administrative workers. Benefits costs in-
creased slightly as well. 
Prices 
Prices moved up slightly in October and early November, 
though contacts expected prices to rise at a somewhat 
faster pace over the next 12 months. Retail prices in-
creased modestly. One contact said that food, home 
goods, and apparel retailers were struggling to pass on 
higher costs; in contrast, another contact noted that 
retailers continued to raise prices to reflect higher poten-
tial and realized tariffs. Producer prices were flat, with 
contacts reporting little change in input costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased slightly on balance over 
the reporting period. Nonauto retail sales decreased 
slightly, as declines in apparel, appliances, and furniture 
outweighed gains in the grocery, home improvement, 
hospitality, and lawn and garden sectors. Contacts noted 
that brick and mortar department stores continued to 
struggle as e-commerce spending grows. Contacts 
remained optimistic that holiday spending would be 
higher than last year. Light vehicle sales increased mod-
erately over the reporting period. The UAW-GM strike 
had a limited effect on GM vehicle sales on net, with a 
decline in sales in October offset by a pickup in Novem-
ber. However, dealers reported a noticeable shortage in 
GM parts, particularly those needed by collision repair 
shops. Used light vehicle sales also moved up moder-
ately. 
Business Spending 
Business spending decreased slightly in October and 
early November. Retail inventories were a little high 
overall. One contact indicated that retailers were building 
stocks as a hedge against potential tariff increases. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Inventories of GM vehicles were lower than normal due 
to the UAW strike, but contacts expected them to return 
to normal by the end of the year. Most manufacturers 
reported comfortable inventory levels. Capital spending 
declined some, though contacts expected a modest 
increase in spending over the next 12 months. Outlays 
were primarily for IT equipment and intellectual property. 
A majority of contacts reported that their newly pur-
chased capital had increased capacity. Demand for 
transportation services declined modestly, most noticea-
bly for long distance trucking. Commercial and industrial 
energy usage declined modestly due to lower demand 
from the industrial sector. Contacts attributed at least 
part of the decline to the GM strike. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was little changed 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased slightly. There were reports that slower growth 
in demand had led some single-family homebuilders to 
slow the pace of new development projects. One contact 
noted an increase in remodeling demand. Home sales 
declined slightly overall, with larger decreases for homes 
at higher price points. Overall, home prices were un-
changed, while rents increased. Nonresidential construc-
tion activity decreased marginally. Commercial real 
estate activity was little changed at a strong level. Con-
tacts noted that demand for industrial space, particularly 
for warehousing and logistics, continued to be solid, and 
activity in the hospitality sector was also strong. Contacts 
reported that demand for commercial real estate as an 
investment vehicle was robust because of relatively high 
capitalization rates in the District compared to other 
regions. Vacancy rates edged lower and the availability 
of sublease space increased slightly. Rents were un-
changed. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased slightly overall in 
October and early November in spite of the strike at GM. 
Steel demand increased slightly, with one contact report-
ing strong demand from energy transmission firms but 
slightly weaker demand from the auto sector. Heavy 
machinery demand increased slightly, spurred by growth 
in the construction and mining industries. Auto produc-
tion declined due to the GM strike, but contacts reported 
that overall auto industry demand was flat and at a solid 
level. Contacts supplying GM reported lower shipments 
due to the strike and expected the recovery in activity to 
take until the end of the year. Specialty metals manufac-
turers reported little change in order books, with flat 
activity across most major sectors. Contacts reported 
increased shipments of heavy trucks, but a decline in 
new orders. Manufacturers of building materials reported 
a slight increase in sales. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly on balance over 
the reporting period. Business loan demand increased 
slightly, with reports of strength in the commercial con-
struction sector, but weakness in the agricultural sector. 
Loan quality edged down and standards were little 
changed. Consumer loan volumes increased modestly 
as lower rates continued to spur mortgage refinancing. 
Quality and standards were little changed. 
Agriculture 
Early frost and snow further delayed this year’s harvest 
and diminished yields. Overall, contacts expected the 
District’s corn and soybean harvests would be much 
smaller than a year ago. In addition, contacts expressed 
concern about crop quality, especially with short propane 
supplies in some places, which limited the amount of 
crop drying farmers could do. Corn and soybean prices 
were down from the previous reporting period, but up 
from a year earlier. Nevertheless, lower expected yields 
meant crop revenues would be down from a year ago. 
Milk, egg, hog, and cattle prices moved up during the 
reporting period. Contacts noted that demand for pork 
from China had grown despite U.S. tariffs because Afri-
can swine fever had decimated China’s hog herd. More 
generally, contacts reported a pickup in overall agricul-
tural exports, with some noting that news on trade nego-
tiations sounded promising for future exports. Farm 
incomes generally are expected to be down from last 
year, although government payments from the Market 
Facilitation Program will provide some support. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have been mixed but generally unchanged since our previous report. Contacts across multiple 
industries continued to note a heightened sense of economic uncertainty. There was a slight uptick in employment. 
Wage increases were widespread and higher than in previous years for the vast majority of firms. Contacts continued to 
report only a slight uptick in prices charged to consumers despite moderate increases to nonlabor input costs. Reports 
from manufacturing firms were mixed. Agriculture conditions remained strained by low crop prices and generally poor 
production and yields. Across all industries, the outlook among surveyed contacts remained slightly pessimistic; on net, 
12 percent of respondents expect conditions during 2020 to be worse or somewhat worse than in 2019.   
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased slightly since the previous 
reporting period. On net, 11 percent of survey respond-
ents reported that employment was higher than a year 
ago, and 41 percent, on net, expect to hire additional 
workers over the next 12 months. Labor market tightness 
persisted across the District; on net, 34 percent of con-
tacts reported difficulty finding qualified workers. Firms 
continued to deal with worker scarcity by raising benefits, 
lowering hiring standards, investing in technology, and/or 
retraining existing employees. Employment conditions in 
manufacturing remained more subdued. Fifty-seven 
percent of manufacturing contacts reported a desire to 
hire more workers, but other survey-based results 
showed slight employment declines in the sector. 
The tight labor market has continued to put upward 
pressure on wages, which have increased moderately 
since the previous report. On net, 38 percent of survey 
respondents indicated that wages were higher than a 
year ago. Seventy-four percent of those seeking to hire 
new workers reported raising wages for some or most 
job categories, and 63 percent of all contacts reported 
raising wages for existing employees by more than they 
have in the past few years.   
 
Prices  
Prices have increased slightly since the previous report. 
On net, just 6 percent of business contacts reported that 
prices charged to consumers increased in the current 
quarter relative to the same time last year. This is the 
fifth consecutive survey in which the share reporting 
higher selling prices has declined. Despite the reported 
softness in prices charged to consumers, firms’ input 
costs continued to increase at a moderate rate. On net, 
32 percent of business contacts reported higher nonla-
bor costs, the same share as in the previous quarter. 
Business contacts in retail and manufacturing reported 
facing increased price pressures due to tariffs.     
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate that consumer activity has been mixed since 
the previous report. October real sales tax collections 
increased in Arkansas and Kentucky but were flat in 
Missouri relative to a year ago. September real sales tax 
collections increased in West Tennessee relative to a 
year ago. General retailers reported that sales have 
been about the same or slightly lower than this time last 
year, and their outlook on future economic conditions 
has turned pessimistic. Most surveyed auto dealers 
reported that sales have been about the same as this 
time last year but have fallen short of expectations, citing 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
rising prices as deterrents to consumer confidence. 
Multiple dealers continued to note seeing an increased 
preference for used and low-end vehicles. Hospitality 
contacts in the St. Louis region shared mixed accounts 
of recent tourism activity relative to a year ago but re-
mained optimistic about the coming months.    
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has been mixed since our previ-
ous report. For the second consecutive quarter, a majori-
ty of survey respondents reported declines in production, 
new orders, and capacity utilization relative to one year 
ago. Makers of vehicle parts noted that a slowdown in 
the automotive industry has negatively impacted sales. 
However, survey-based indexes indicate that manufac-
turing activity overall expanded slightly in Arkansas and 
Missouri from September to October, with new orders 
and production increasing moderately in both states. 
Contacts were slightly optimistic about the future; on net, 
most survey respondents expect manufacturing condi-
tions to improve slightly in the first quarter of 2020.     
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the services sector has improved modestly 
since the previous report. On net, around 40 percent of 
survey respondents reported higher sales compared with 
the same time last year, and 45 percent expect this 
growth to continue into the first quarter of 2020. Howev-
er, nearly a third of contacts noted that sales halfway 
through the fourth quarter have fallen short of expecta-
tions, which some credited to increased economic uncer-
tainty. Transportation activity has been mixed since the 
previous report. Trucking contacts reported that lacklus-
ter demand for freight transportation has put downward 
pressure on prices. Barge traffic in Little Rock exceeded 
expectations in the first half of the fourth quarter.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has been mixed since the 
previous report. Seasonally adjusted home sales in-
creased slightly from August to September in Little Rock, 
Louisville, and Memphis but decreased slightly in St. 
Louis. On net, 10 percent of survey respondents report-
ed a decrease in demand for single-family homes rela-
tive to a year ago, and some contacts noted that fourth-
quarter sales have fallen short of expectations. Inventory 
levels remained depressed.  
Residential construction activity increased slightly. There 
was a slight uptick in September permit activity across 
District MSAs relative to the previous month. On net, 10 
percent of survey respondents reported higher construc-
tion activity compared with the same time last year, and 
20 percent expect continued growth in the next quarter. 
Builders in the St. Louis area expect an uptick in activity 
in the near future due to lower mortgage rates and a 
reduction in home inventory.  
Commercial real estate activity has increased slightly 
since the previous report. Survey respondents reported a 
slight increase in demand for office space relative to one 
year ago, a slight decrease in demand for retail space, 
and no change in demand for industrial space. Contacts, 
on net, also noted slightly higher demand for multifamily 
properties. 
Commercial construction activity was mixed. Survey 
respondents reported higher demand for office and 
industrial property construction. However, there were 
some reports of firms putting future projects on hold 
because of economic uncertainty.      
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have experienced little 
change since the previous report. Demand for mortgag-
es and auto loans decreased slightly relative to one year 
ago, and demand for commercial and industry loans fell 
modestly. However, there was a sharp increase in credit 
card borrowing relative to the same time last year. Bank-
ers expect a slight increase in total loan demand in the 
first quarter of 2020. Credit standards tightened overall 
compared with year-ago levels. Delinquencies were flat 
on a year-over-year basis but are expected to increase 
moderately in the first quarter of 2020.     
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have remained unchanged 
from the previous reporting period and well below those 
from a year ago. Corn and soybean yield forecasts in-
creased from October, while cotton yield forecasts have 
declined modestly. All three crops and rice are projected 
to have lower yields than last year. Production forecasts 
for corn, cotton, and soybeans have increased slightly 
since the previous report. Production levels for corn, rice, 
and soybeans are expected to be significantly lower than 
in 2018, while that for cotton is expected to increase 
modestly. District contacts continued to express con-
cerns over depressed agriculture commodity prices. 
Natural resource extraction conditions declined modestly 
from September to October, with seasonally adjusted 
production declining by nearly 4 percent. October pro-
duction decreased 8 percent from a year ago.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew at a modest pace since the last report. Employment grew slightly, while wage pres-
sures were moderate overall and price pressures remained modest. The District economy saw growth in consumer 
spending, commercial and residential construction and real estate, and energy. However, manufacturing declined slight-
ly, while agricultural conditions remained weak.   
Employment and Wages 
Employment was slightly higher since the last report. In 
several ad hoc polls, conducted in three states among a 
mix of business types, a majority of respondents said 
they were hiring in some capacity. A broader poll of 
contacts across the District found somewhat softer (but 
still positive) sentiment about recent and future 
employment levels at their firms. An October survey of 
manufacturers in Minnesota and the Dakotas found that 
hiring sentiment had improved from contractionary levels 
a month earlier. A second survey among bankers and 
other rural businesses in these same states found that 
new-hiring sentiment was quite positive. Job postings 
this fall were modestly higher in the Dakotas and 
Michigan’s Upper Peninsula, while Minnesota’s were 
lower.  A major layoff at a manufacturer in central 
Minnesota, involving more than 800, was seen by some 
local employers as a contribution to the local labor pool. 
However, contacts widely noted difficulty filling open 
positions, including in manufacturing, which has been 
experiencing some overall softness. Many staffing 
contacts reported lower job orders from clients, 
particularly in manufacturing, with some seeing declines 
of 20 percent, year over year. Initial unemployment 
insurance claims over the most recent six-week period 
(through the end of October) were about 3 percent 
higher than a year earlier, with increases seen in 
Montana, North Dakota, and Wisconsin, while Minnesota 
saw a slight decline. 
Wage pressures were moderate overall. Staffing 
contacts suggested varying degrees of wage pressure. 
Among a group of six staffing offices (all with the same 
franchise, located mostly in Minnesota), average wages 
rose less than 2 percent at three locations over the 
previous 12 months, but more than 5 percent at two 
locations, and almost 10 percent at the remaining office. 
In the span of one week in October, a staffing contact in 
western Wisconsin said four manufacturing clients 
increased wages by $1 to $3 an hour. A Minneapolis Fed 
survey of Districtwide businesses found that 62 percent 
of employers raised wages by 3 percent or more 
compared with a year earlier. However, among a small 
sample of large Minnesota firms, most reported 
increasing wages by less than 3 percent over the past 12 
months. As has been the pattern for some time, 
however, contacts continued to believe that future wage 
increases will be slightly to modestly softer than previous 
wage gains.    
Prices  
Price pressures remained modest since the previous 
report. A majority of respondents to a survey of large 
District firms reported recent increases in nonlabor input 
costs of less than 2 percent, with a similar outlook for the 
coming 12 months. Retail fuel prices as of mid-
November were slightly lower in most areas of the 
District relative to the previous reporting period. Home 
heating costs were expected to rise more in District 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
states than nationwide this winter, largely due to 
differences in regional increases in the prices of natural 
gas. Prices received by farmers in September increased 
from a year earlier for corn, potatoes, milk, hogs, and 
turkeys, while prices for wheat, soybeans, hay, cattle, 
eggs, and chickens decreased.    
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased moderately since the last 
report. Gross retail sales in South Dakota jumped more 
than 6 percent in September compared with a year 
earlier. The state also saw 11 percent growth in gaming 
receipts. But gross sales in Wisconsin were down 1 
percent over the same period, following fairly strong 
summer sales. Sales tax receipts in Minnesota and 
North Dakota have also trended higher than forecasts. A 
vehicle dealership with multiple sales outlets in the 
western portion of the District saw vehicle sales fall 
modestly in September compared with a year earlier, but 
rebounded with an 8 percent increase in October. Airport 
traffic in September and October was strong across 
many of the District’s regional airports. In Minnesota, 
hotel occupancy and revenue per available room 
improved modestly in September (year over year). 
Lodging and accommodations taxes in Montana were 
also slightly higher in the third quarter compared with 
2018. However, several bankers noted that consumer 
loan demand was mixed. Monthly visitors to several 
major national parks in the District also saw double-digit 
declines in September (year over year). Restaurants and 
other businesses catering to consumers reported having 
to shorten hours of operation due to lack of staffing.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction rose moderately since the last 
report. A construction database showed that new and 
active projects across the District over the most recent 
six-week period (ending in early November) were 
modestly higher than the same period a year earlier. 
Most contacts in engineering, architecture, and 
construction reported solid backlogs and were optimistic 
heading into a traditionally slower period. Commercial 
permitting this fall was broadly higher across most of the 
District’s larger cities, and was particularly strong in 
Sioux Falls, S.D.; one notable exception was the city of 
Minneapolis, where permitting slowed in October. A 
contact in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula said the region 
was seeing normal seasonal slowdown, and there were 
fewer projects to bid on for work next year. Residential 
construction was moderately higher; single-family 
construction was higher in many locations, but flat in a 
few places; multifamily construction was mostly lower. 
However, both single- and multifamily construction were 
strongly higher in Minneapolis-St. Paul in September and 
October. 
Commercial real estate improved modestly since the last 
report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, office vacancy rates 
were down slightly compared with this summer. 
Industrial space in the region continued to expand, but 
strong leasing activity kept vacancy rates low. Retail 
vacancy rates have remained among the lowest in the 
country, thanks to strong leasing and lower levels of new 
construction. Rental rates, however, have been flat or 
falling. Office vacancies have trended lower this year in 
Sioux Falls, and industrial vacancies were stable; 
however, retail vacancies there were still elevated. 
Multifamily vacancy rates remained low across most of 
the District, according to sources. Residential real estate 
was modestly higher across the District. Closed home 
sales in September and October in Minnesota were 
about 2 percent higher over the same period a year 
earlier. Higher sales over this period were also seen in 
western Wisconsin, Grand Forks and Fargo, N.D., and 
Bozeman and Missoula, Mont. However, slower sales 
were seen in northern Wisconsin and Sioux Falls.    
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity declined modestly from the 
last report. Contacts continued to point to decreases in 
orders, production, and capital spending. A heavy 
equipment producer noted a slowdown in sales that they 
initially blamed on heavy rainfall this year, but said this 
“masks a much deeper contraction in capital equipment 
spending.” Custom manufacturers reported a decrease 
in order backlogs. In contrast, an index of manufacturing 
conditions indicated increased activity in October 
compared with a month earlier in Minnesota and South 
Dakota and flat activity in North Dakota.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions declined from an already 
weak position. Roughly three in five lenders responding 
to the Minneapolis Fed’s third-quarter (October) survey 
of agricultural credit conditions reported that farm 
incomes decreased in the third quarter relative to a year 
earlier, with a similar proportion reporting decreased 
capital spending. Persistent heavy rains have delayed 
harvests and damaged crop quality in substantial 
portions of the District. District oil and gas exploration 
activity was steady since the previous report. The 
number of active drilling rigs as of early November fell 
slightly from a month earlier, but the most recent figures 
(as of August) indicated that oil production hit a new 
record. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity held steady in October and early November, although conditions were mixed across 
sectors. Consumer spending edged down since the previous survey period as higher retail sales were offset by lower 
sales in the auto, restaurant, and tourism sectors. Manufacturers noted weaker activity, led by continued declines in 
durable goods production, but manufacturers expected activity to stabilize in the months ahead. Contacts in the trans-
portation sector noted slightly lower sales, while sales in the wholesale trade and professional and high-tech services 
sectors rose. District real estate conditions rose slightly, although residential construction contacts expected lower activi-
ty moving into the winter months. Energy activity continued to fall in the District, and the outlook for drilling and business 
activity softened. The agriculture sector remained weak, and credit conditions worsened as farm income and loan repay-
ment rates fell. District employment and employee hours held steady since the previous survey period, but a majority of 
contacts reported ongoing shortages of qualified labor. Wages continued to expand at a modest pace, and contacts 
expected moderate growth in the months ahead. Services sector contacts noted higher input and selling prices since the 
previous survey period, while manufacturers noted slightly lower prices for finished products and raw materials.          
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours held steady 
since the last survey period, and both remained above 
year-ago levels. Job gains in the professional and tech-
nical services, real estate, health services and wholesale 
trade sectors were offset by losses in the manufacturing, 
auto sales, transportation, and tourism and hotel sectors. 
Employment in all industries, with the exception of the 
auto sales sector, was at or above levels from the same 
period a year ago, and contacts expected employment to 
rise in the next few months.  
A majority of contacts continued to report labor shortag-
es across all skill levels, and a lack of qualified appli-
cants was cited as the number one reason for not filling 
open positions over the last three months. Specifically, 
respondents noted shortages for truck drivers, hourly 
retail and food-services positions, auto-technicians, IT 
personnel, nurses, engineers and skilled construction 
trades. Wages continued to grow modestly since the 
previous survey period, and strong gains were expected 
in the months ahead.              
Prices  
Input and selling prices rose modestly in October and 
early November in the services sector, while manufactur-
ers noted slightly lower prices. Both input and selling 
prices were expected to increase moving forward for all 
reporting sectors. Contacts in the retail trade sector 
noted moderate input price gains and modestly higher 
selling prices. Input and selling prices in the restaurant 
sector rose modestly, and were strongly above year-ago 
levels. The transportation sector saw modest gains in 
both input and selling prices. Construction supply re-
spondents noted steady selling prices since the previous 
survey period, although selling prices were below year-
ago levels. Manufacturers noted slightly lower prices for 
finished products and raw materials. Construction supply 
and manufacturing respondents expected small price 
increases moving forward.              
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending edged down in October and early 
November relative to the previous survey period, howev-
er contacts expected sales to expand during the upcom-
ing holiday season. Retail sales grew modestly com-
pared to the previous survey period, and remained 
above year-ago levels. After steady increases through 
the late summer months, auto sales fell modestly com-
pared to both the previous survey period and year-ago 
levels. Contacts noted that SUVs and trucks sold well, 
while sedans sold poorly. Both auto and retail trade 
contacts were optimistic about future sales and expected 
increases in the coming months. Restaurant sales fell 
slightly compared to the previous survey, but were 
sharply higher than a year ago. Tourism activity was 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
weaker than the last survey, but slightly above levels 
from a year ago. Above average snowfall in the moun-
tain areas has led to increased optimism about winter 
tourism activity this season.         
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity fell slightly in October and early 
November due to persistent declines in durable goods 
factory activity, however manufacturers expected activity 
to slightly increase in the months ahead. Factory produc-
tion, order backlogs, and new orders each declined com-
pared to the previous survey period, and contacts ex-
pected production, shipments, and the volume of new 
orders to increase in the months ahead. Capital spend-
ing was modestly above year-ago levels, and contacts 
anticipated slight growth in spending in the months 
ahead.  
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the transportation 
sector experienced slightly lower sales, while sales 
increased strongly in the wholesale trade sector and 
modestly in the professional and high-tech services 
sector. All three sectors expected sales to increase in 
the months ahead. Transportation sector contacts antici-
pated slight decreases in capital spending in the coming 
months, while wholesale trade and professional and high
-tech services contacts expected spending to increase.               
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity rose slightly since the last 
survey period and was above year-ago levels. Residen-
tial real estate sales held steady in October and early 
November, although sales were higher than a year ago. 
Residential construction activity rose modestly over the 
previous survey period as starts, traffic of potential buy-
ers, and construction supply sales rose. However, ex-
pectations were for a decrease in residential construction 
activity moving into the winter months. Commercial real 
estate activity inched up as sales, absorption, and com-
pletions rose while vacancy rates fell and construction 
underway held steady. Overall activity in the commercial 
real estate sector was projected to grow slightly.   
Banking 
Overall loan demand rose slightly during the survey 
period, although demand across categories was mixed. 
Bankers noted higher demand for commercial real estate 
and consumer installment loans, but experienced flat 
demand for residential real estate loans, and lower de-
mand for commercial and industrial and agricultural 
loans. Bankers continued to see modest improvement in 
loan quality compared to levels at the same time last 
year and expected loan quality to hold steady during the 
next six months. Credit standards held steady across all 
major loan categories. Deposits edged up, although 
several bankers noted poor demand for certificates of 
deposits during the survey period.              
Energy 
District energy activity decreased since the previous 
survey period, and expectations for future drilling and 
business activity eased. The number of active rigs con-
tinued to decline across most states but was primarily 
driven by a decrease in Oklahoma. Oil and gas produc-
tion eased slightly, but still remained at generally high 
levels. As a result, production levels continued to support 
strong mid-stream and transportation activity. Revenues 
and profit levels of regional firms fell compared to a year 
ago and earlier this year, in part due to lower commodity 
prices. District employment levels and capital expendi-
tures in the industry also eased.               
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy remained weak, and 
agricultural credit conditions deteriorated slightly. In the 
most recent survey period, regional contacts reported 
that farm income and loan repayment rates continued to 
decline at a modest pace. Demand for farm loans re-
mained strong, but the pace of growth slowed from previ-
ous survey periods. Despite some support from govern-
ment payments connected to ongoing trade disputes, 
most bankers pointed to an ongoing environment of low 
agricultural commodity prices and elevated costs as the 
primary factors contributing to further weakness. As 
profit opportunities remained limited, producer working 
capital deteriorated slightly, and a modest number of 
borrowers were expected to sell assets before the end of 
the year to improve liquidity.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Moderate expansion continued in the Eleventh District economy. Growth held fairly steady in services and retail but 
decelerated slightly in manufacturing. Home sales remained on the rise while energy activity continued to decline. The 
agriculture picture was mixed, with continued drought conditions but rising prices and decent production prospects. 
Employment growth was solid and upward wage pressures continued. Selling prices were largely flat, as firms’ ability to 
pass through increased costs remained limited. Outlooks generally improved, except in energy and financial services. 
Uncertainty generally remained elevated, driven by trade tensions, the political climate, and weaker global growth. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to expand at a solid pace. Hiring 
accelerated slightly in the service sector and remained 
above average in manufacturing. Headcounts continued 
to fall in the oil and gas sector. Labor shortages re-
mained pervasive, with multiple contacts specifically 
mentioning the drag this was having on business growth. 
Staffing services contacts reported a very tight labor 
market with most companies struggling to find qualified 
workers across skill levels.  
Wages continued to increase, with pressures picking up 
slightly over the reporting period.  
Prices 
Input prices continued to rise at a moderate pace, except 
in the energy sector where they remained flat at low 
levels. Some contacts, particularly manufacturers and 
retailers, pointed to tariffs as a primary driver of in-
creased costs. Selling prices were largely flat, although 
airline contacts noted a slight increase in ticket prices 
over the past six weeks. Some contacts said they are 
unable to sufficiently raise prices to cover their increas-
ing costs.  
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector slowed to a more 
modest pace, and demand weakened slightly. Several 
contacts noted that slowing demand was due to energy 
sector weakness and a general pullback among custom-
ers due to heightened uncertainty. Production declines 
were noted in machinery and fabricated metals manufac-
turing—two segments with ties to the energy sector. 
Meanwhile, output of nondurable goods picked up pace 
over the reporting period. Refiners and chemical produc-
ers said softening global demand, tariffs, and ongoing 
trade policy uncertainty were squeezing margins.  
Outlooks among manufacturers remained positive, and 
expectations for manufacturing activity six months ahead 
increased across a variety of measures. Trade tensions 
remained a concern, however, and some contacts noted 
that uncertainty was making planning difficult.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales continued to grow at a moderate pace over 
the reporting period, although some weakness was seen 
in autos and among wholesalers. Retailers experiencing 
a pickup in sales pointed to lower interest rates, favora-
ble weather, and increased internet sales as factors 
boosting growth. One retailer noted that sales at stores 
near the Mexican border continued to be challenging 
compared with previous years. Overall retail outlooks 
improved notably, although some contacts cited trade 
issues as a headwind, including instability in some coun-
tries where they do business. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services activity continued to expand mod-
erately over the reporting period, even picking up pace 
slightly. Growth in professional and technical services 
continued to lead the expansion, joined in the latest 
period by healthcare services. Weakness was seen in 
administrative and support services. Staffing services 
contacts reported mostly softer demand, though still at 
relatively high levels. Staffing contacts noted strength in 
healthcare and banking but weakness in energy. Activity 
in the transportation and warehousing sector remained 
mixed, with strong airline passenger demand and rising 
sea cargo volumes but some weakness in rail cargo. 
Service-sector outlooks improved over the past six 
weeks, although uncertainty remained elevated. Global 
economic uncertainty and trade tensions continued to be 
the predominant factors hampering future planning. 
Domestic political uncertainty moving into the 2020 
elections also came up as an area of concern for several 
contacts. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales continued to rise, although a few contacts 
noted slight seasonal weakness. Sales were up year 
over year partly due to lower mortgage rates, and most 
builders were meeting or exceeding expectations. Build-
ers have managed to sell off inventory, bringing the 
supply of finished vacant homes down to normal levels. 
Some builders were able to pass through select price 
increases, improving their margins, and outlooks were 
mostly optimistic. Recent tornadoes in Dallas-Fort Worth 
damaged homes, which spurred demand for rentals. 
Apartment demand generally remained healthy, with 
occupancy tightest in Austin. Rents rose slightly. Investor 
appetite was solid, and apartment construction continued 
to be elevated. Leasing of office and industrial space 
remained active.  
Financial Services 
Growth in loan demand continued at a moderate pace 
over the reporting period, bolstered primarily by commer-
cial and residential real estate loans. Commercial and 
industrial loan volumes held steady while consumer loan 
volumes again contracted slightly. Credit standards 
continued to tighten across the board. While business 
activity picked up since the last reporting period, the 
outlook for activity six months from now deteriorated 
slightly. Bankers cited concerns regarding the uncertain 
business climate and lower interest rates hampering 
pricing flexibility. 
 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District continued to 
erode, with firms cutting spending and orders for new 
equipment. Well completion activity has proved more 
resilient, particularly in the Permian Basin, slipping only 
slightly from recent highs. The oilfield services market 
remained depressed, with little optimism about better 
margins next year. 
Firms were more pessimistic in their outlooks through 
the end of 2020 than during the prior reporting period 
due to a weaker economic outlook and tightening credit 
conditions. Contacts noted that some firms were pivoting 
to international markets for growth opportunities and 
where there is hope for higher margins.  
Agriculture 
Much of Texas remained abnormally dry or in drought. 
Even still, crop conditions were mostly fair to good, and 
were more favorable than this time last year. Texas crop 
production estimates for 2019 exceed 2018 for several 
crops, including corn, sorghum and cotton. Crop and 
livestock prices generally trended higher over the report-
ing period. Milk prices also rose, nearing a profitable 
level for dairies after a couple of difficult years, according 
to contacts. Contacts noted continued concern among 
agricultural producers over trade issues with China but 
noted there was increased optimism regarding trade 
talks and the possibility of some tariffs being removed. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded at a modest pace during the reporting period of October through mid-
November. The labor market remained tight, employment growth picked up moderately, and wages rose modestly. 
Reports on price inflation were mixed. Sales of retail goods increased somewhat, and activity in consumer and business 
services was solid. The pace of commerce in the manufacturing sector was little changed, and activity in the agriculture 
sector was mixed. Residential and commercial real estate markets expanded moderately. Lending grew further.  
 
 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market remained tight, and employment 
growth picked up moderately. Businesses in sectors 
including health care, finance, and manufacturing noted 
solid hiring activity, while others reported that shortages 
of qualified labor prevented them from filling vacancies. 
In the Mountain West, a producer of building products 
hired tradespeople in response to improved construction 
activity, and a contact in Boise reported that a major e-
commerce business was opening a distribution center in 
the area, resulting in anticipatory hiring. In the Pacific 
Northwest, a health-care provider expanded its work-
force in response to higher demand. Worker turnover 
also spurred hiring activity, as in the case of a credit 
union in Northern California. A community banking con-
tact in Oregon saw previously robust demand for work-
ers moderate slightly.  
Wages rose modestly across sectors as companies tried 
to attract qualified workers in highly competitive labor 
markets. Wages picked up further for skilled finance and 
technology workers, according to community banks, 
credit unions, and financial technology companies 
across the District. A provider of business security ser-
vices in Seattle observed that labor costs have risen to 
the highest level in company history. A few businesses in 
higher cost urban areas noted efforts to relocate jobs to 
lower cost areas of the District in order to contain labor 
compensation. Several reports mentioned that forthcom-
ing increases in the minimum wage taking effect in the 
new year would result in higher wages for most hourly 
workers as employers adjust pay scales upwards.        
Prices  
Reports on prices were mixed, but suggested that infla-
tion was up slightly on balance. A handful of businesses, 
such as a quick service restaurant chain and a profes-
sional security provider, reported that selling prices were 
higher due to a pickup in wage costs that could not be 
sustainably absorbed by profit margins. Health-care 
service providers noted that inflation ticked up for many 
products and treatments due to solid patient traffic. 
Some producers of building materials and wood products 
increased selling prices in response to improved con-
struction activity, while others lowered prices somewhat 
in response to weak export demand. Contacts in metals 
manufacturing and public utilities reported stable prices 
on inputs such as copper and natural gas. In Southern 
California, subdued demand for hotel lodging resulted in 
a slowdown in room rate inflation and, for some hotels, 
modest declines in prices.  
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods increased somewhat. Most reports 
indicated that consumer demand was steady, with 
spending supported by increasing incomes borne of tight 
labor markets. Sales at specialized outlets, such as 
home improvement stores and pet supply stores, rose 
The Beige Book ■ November 2019 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
noticeably. Retailers were generally optimistic about 
holiday sales, given solid consumer spending over the 
past year and other factors like continued service im-
provements at e-commerce outlets. A few businesses 
expected to rely more on discount pricing schemes than 
in previous holiday seasons due to brisk competition. 
Some businesses that depend primarily on brick-and-
mortar sales were concerned about inclement weather 
constraining foot traffic; one contact noted that, with 
Thanksgiving falling later than usual, the shorter holiday 
shopping season could damp sales.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
was solid. Across the District, demand for health ser-
vices was strong and in some cases led service provid-
ers to open new locations. In the entertainment sector, 
the robust growth of streaming services has resulted in a 
boom in television and movie production that could lead 
to expansion in locales in the District outside of Southern 
California. Sales at quick service restaurants grew stead-
ily, though one contact in Southern California noted a 
few restaurants closed in response to labor and operat-
ing costs that exceeded sales revenue. In California, the 
tourism sector saw mixed activity, with sales at leisure 
cruise companies rising somewhat and occupancy rates 
at hotels around San Diego falling modestly.    
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector was little changed. A 
metals manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest reported 
that demand was steady, though order backlogs for most 
producers were no longer growing. Domestic wood 
product manufacturers saw the pace of sales pick up 
modestly thanks to the stabilizing housing market, which 
followed the broad decline in mortgage rates. In general, 
these manufacturers also noted stiff competition with 
producers from countries that have not been targeted 
with tariffs. However, one contact noted that production 
constraints at sawmills in Canada have benefited do-
mestic producers by reducing Canadian supply to the 
United States.   
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Reports on activity in the agricultural sector were mixed. 
In the Central Valley of California, one contact noted 
solid yields and sales for crops like tomatoes, beans, 
and grapes, while another observed disappointing nut 
yields and continued weak export demand. Profitability 
for growers improved slightly, however, as they adjusted 
their supply levels in response to the new environment of 
subdued demand from abroad. Activity in the livestock 
sector was also mixed, with demand for beef and dairy 
cattle ticking down and demand for swine picking up 
somewhat. A lumber producer from the Pacific North-
west reported that production has been steady, but 
exports continue to decline due to trade tensions and 
slowing foreign economies. For some wheat growers in 
Eastern Washington, recent inclement weather prevent-
ed them from planting, while tensions with trading part-
ners have resulted in an oversupply in domestic markets 
and tighter profit margins.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity expanded moderately on 
balance. Several reports noted that permitting picked up, 
along with sales, due in part to lower interest rates spur-
ring construction and demand. Labor shortages and 
higher materials costs still limited construction starts 
somewhat, but a few respondents indicated that materi-
als were now more readily available and wait times for 
contractors had shortened modestly. Prices grew a bit, 
with historically elevated selling prices and rents leading 
buyers in some urban areas to relocate. Robust demand 
continued to outpace supply and push up prices in the 
Mountain West, especially in metro areas like Boise. In 
Seattle and Los Angeles, contacts noted a mixed picture 
of the residential market, with some indicating that time-
on-market for houses increased amid flagging demand 
and others observing robust construction activity and 
sales.  
Activity in commercial real estate markets also expanded 
moderately. Demand for industrial spaces like factories 
and distribution centers was brisk in Southern California.  
Commercial construction activity was stable to up slightly 
in Oregon. In Seattle, major developers have initiated 
new commercial projects to meet the demand of busi-
nesses that have expanded employment and operations. 
In the Los Angeles area, rents have risen to such high 
levels in response to past robust demand for office 
space that leasing activity has cooled slightly. A contact 
in the Central Valley of California observed a modest 
decline in commercial permitting.   
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew solidly, with most reports noting a 
further pickup in loan demand and a few noting no 
change over the reporting period. In general, lower inter-
est rates drove more lending activity, but also resulted in 
narrower interest margins for many banks. A financial 
technology company that lends primarily to small busi-
nesses reported steady activity. Credit quality was strong 
across most of the District, though a few banks reported 
tighter underwriting standards for new loans in the face 
of uncertainty about future economic conditions. ■ 


