The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
July 15, 2020 
July 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
based on information collected on or before July 6, 2020. This docu-
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity increased in almost all Districts, but remained well below where it was prior to the COVID-19 pan-
demic. Consumer spending picked up as many nonessential businesses were allowed to reopen. Retail sales rose in 
all Districts, led by a rebound in vehicle sales and sustained growth in the food and beverage and home improvement 
sectors. Leisure and hospitality spending improved, but was far below year-ago levels. Most Districts reported that 
manufacturing activity moved up, but from a very low level. Demand for professional and business services increased 
in most Districts, but was still weak. Transportation activity rose overall on higher truck and air cargo volumes. Con-
struction remained subdued, but picked up in some Districts. Home sales increased moderately, but commercial real 
estate activity stayed at a low level. Financial conditions in the agriculture sector continued to be poor, while energy 
sector activity fell further because of limited demand and oversupply. Loan demand was flat outside of some Paycheck 
Protection Program (PPP) activity and increased residential mortgages. The PPP and loan deferrals by private lenders 
reportedly provided many firms with sufficient liquidity for the near term. Outlooks remained highly uncertain, as con-
tacts grappled with how long the COVID-19 pandemic would continue and the magnitude of its economic implications.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment increased on net in almost all Districts as many businesses reopened or ramped up activity. Districts 
highlighted gains in the retail and leisure and hospitality sectors. However, payrolls in all Districts were well below pre-
pandemic levels. Job turnover rates remained high, with contacts across Districts reporting new layoffs. Contacts in 
nearly every District noted difficulty in bringing back workers because of health and safety concerns, childcare needs, 
and generous unemployment insurance benefits. Many contacts who have been retaining workers with help from the 
PPP said that going forward, the strength of demand would determine whether they can avoid layoffs. 
Prices 
Prices were little changed overall. Contacts across Districts largely reported both input and selling prices were flat. 
When input prices did change, increases slightly outnumbered decreases. Contacts in several Districts reported that 
supply chain challenges were pushing up prices for health and safety equipment used to limit the spread of COVID-19. 
There were also reports of rising food and beverage prices, particularly for beef. When selling prices changed, decreas-
es outnumbered increases, as contacts in several Districts cited weak demand and limited pricing power. One excep-
tion noted by multiple Districts was new and used vehicle prices, which were boosted by low inventories.  
Boston 
Economic activity generally improved since the last 
report, even as significant disruptions attributable to the 
pandemic continued. Some firms called back workers let 
go earlier in the spring, and a few engaged in net new 
hiring, while others began layoffs. Activity in the region’s 
residential and commercial real estate markets remained 
exceedingly slow. The outlook continues to be unusually 
uncertain. 
New York 
The regional economy has begun to rebound in recent 
weeks, though activity is still well below pre-pandemic 
levels and many sectors remain depressed. Businesses 
have called back some furloughed workers and there 
have been scattered reports of new hiring, but the labor 
market remains weak. Prices and wages have been 
mostly steady, on balance. 
 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Business activity expanded moderately during the cur-
rent Beige Book period but remained far below levels 
attained prior to the onset of COVID-19. Firms faced 
several challenges for hiring, yet wages appear to be 
trending slightly lower. In contrast, prices are trending 
slightly higher, as the market and supply chain disrup-
tions of a fitful economic restart have created various 
price spikes. Uncertainty has increased.  
Cleveland 
Activity picked up across a wide range of businesses as 
more of the economy reopened. However, business 
conditions remained weak overall. And while contacts 
expect activity to increase further in coming months, they 
remain concerned about the sustainability of the recov-
ery if the spread of COVID-19 is not contained. This 
caution is partly reflected in continued weakness in 
capital spending and hiring plans. 
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy expanded as many segments 
of the economy were able to reopen, although economic 
activity has yet to return to pre-pandemic levels. Retail 
and leisure travel, in particular, benefited from eased 
restrictions. Employment rebounded somewhat but 
remained well below prior levels. Price growth accelerat-
ed moderately, mainly driven by supply chain disruptions 
and high demand for certain goods.  
Atlanta 
Economic conditions remained soft. Labor markets 
improved and nonlabor costs were muted. Overall, retail 
sales strengthened. Tourism activity resumed, though 
limited by capacity constraints. Residential real estate 
conditions improved, and commercial real estate activity 
was mixed. Manufacturing activity weakened. Banking 
conditions worsened.  
Chicago 
Economic activity increased strongly. Employment, 
consumer spending, and manufacturing increased sub-
stantially, while business spending and construction and 
real estate activity increased modestly. Wages edged 
up, prices declined slightly, and financial conditions 
deteriorated modestly. The pandemic continued to weigh 
on agriculture incomes. 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic activity has rebounded sharply since during 
late May; however, overall conditions remain significantly 
depressed and the pace of recovery appears to have 
slowed since mid-June. In comparison with our previous 
report, the outlook among contacts is slightly more pessi-
mistic while also much more uncertain.  
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity was mixed across sec-
tors since the previous report, after more dramatic con-
tractions in recent reporting periods. Consumer spending 
and tourism improved—after significant previous de-
clines—due to emergency federal stimulus and the 
gradual reopening of state economies in the District. 
Most other sectors saw continued decline overall, espe-
cially relative to normal activity levels. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity rebounded slightly in June, and con-
tacts expected additional gains in the months ahead. 
Consumer spending increased modestly, including high-
er retail, auto, restaurant and tourism sales. Residential 
real estate also picked up, but commercial real estate 
conditions deteriorated further. Manufacturing activity 
expanded slightly, but the energy and agriculture sectors 
remained a drag on the regional economy.  
Dallas 
Economic activity in the Eleventh District rebounded, but 
was still well below pre-COVID levels. Manufacturing 
and service sector activity grew. While drilling activity fell 
to new lows and loan demand contracted further, senti-
ment among energy and finance contacts improved. 
New-home sales rose strongly. Employment held steady, 
according to contacts. Input costs increased and selling 
prices fell. Outlooks improved, but the upward trend in 
new COVID-19 cases has increased uncertainty. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District contracted mod-
estly. Employment levels increased slightly. Prices re-
mained generally flat. Sales of retail goods rose moder-
ately, while consumer and business services activity 
contracted sharply. Activity in the manufacturing sector 
was mixed, and the agriculture sector remained weak. 
Residential construction activity picked up somewhat, 
while the commercial side was mixed. Lending activity 
ticked up. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity picked up somewhat in the second half of May and June, according to First District business contacts, 
but largely remained well below year-earlier levels. Retailers reported increased sales in June, with some online pur-
chases exceeding June 2019. Tourism contacts cited much-improved summer bookings in coastal areas compared with 
cancellations in April and May. Manufacturing results were mixed, but most reported rising revenues. Software and 
information technology services firms said their businesses were holding steady, with declines in new orders but contin-
uing strength from existing customers. Commercial and residential real estate markets in the region continued to report 
that activity had paused. Considerable uncertainty characterized respondents’ outlooks, as was the case in the May 
report. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment changes were mixed across firms and sec-
tors. One retailer brought back all corporate staff full time 
on July 1 and plans to bring about 1,800 furloughed 
warehouse and store employees back to work in August. 
An online retailer is hiring more workers, particularly 
customer service, to meet increased demand. Employ-
ment among manufacturers was mixed, with some firms 
hiring many workers and others engaging in layoffs and 
furloughs. An aerospace manufacturer laid off 7 percent 
of its workforce and cut salaries for all employees includ-
ing senior executives. A toy maker furloughed salespeo-
ple and complained that production workers had not re-
turned because of generous UI benefits. Responding 
software and IT services firms said they have continued 
to pay employees fully, partly funded by declines in 
operating expenses due to travel cutbacks. Headcount 
was down since last quarter at two software firms that 
froze hiring. By contrast, one IT firm continued to hire 
and said other layoffs in tech made it possible for them 
to bring on new highly skilled workers. 
Prices  
Prices continued to receive little mention. Manufacturing 
contacts cited a benign pricing environment with no one 
reporting significant positive or negative pricing pressure 
either among their suppliers or in their end-markets. 
Similarly, most software and IT services contacts report-
ed no current plans to change pricing. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail respondents continued to report major disruptions 
related to COVID-19 shut-downs but, despite the chal-
lenges, sales have improved since April. One contact re-
ported increasing strength week-to-week in June, with 
women’s clothing and outdoor equipment leading sales 
growth. An online retailer similarly reported increased 
revenue and continued growth in first-time users. They 
noted sustained year-over-year increases in sales of 
home office supplies and, more recently, higher sales of 
large home appliances, which previously were not a 
major source of revenue. One retailer whose sales dra-
matically increased in March and slumped in April and 
May reported June results at nearly the same level as 
June 2019. One contacted retailer noted looting and 
vandalism from the protests in early June at several 
stores. 
Travel industry contacts reported improved bookings of 
hotel stays and short-term rental properties. In one 
coastal area, hotel bookings have nearly returned to 
2019 levels for July and August. Restaurants in these 
areas continue to report difficulties adjusting to distanc-
ing restrictions, but each successive weekend has result-
ed in more customers. Air travel, however, remains 
severely impacted by the pandemic; total air passengers 
in Boston in June were down more than 85 percent from 
the same time last year, an improvement from April 
(down over 97 percent). Cruise traffic has been halted 
until September. 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Experiences varied widely across the eight manufactur-
ing firms contacted this cycle. A frozen fish producer and 
a maker of cardboard boxes reported very strong de-
mand and sales; the box company said that sales growth 
slowed in June but was still strong. A toy company said 
that business had slowed significantly since April, partly 
because the cessation of movie production hit their 
media tie-ins, and partly because of production difficul-
ties. An aerospace company said that while defense 
sales remained strong, commercial aviation declined. 
Idle planes mean no demand for aftermarket parts; in 
addition, build rates for new planes are falling because 
the travel recession is expected to last until 2022 and 
consequently airlines do not want to take delivery of new 
planes. A manufacturer and retailer of furniture which 
closed in March has reopened and hired back most of its 
employees after securing PPP funding and seeing de-
mand pick up. A travel industry contact reported that 
goods trade through Boston’s port fell in May, with ex-
ports down 40 percent and imports down 9 percent from 
the prior year. 
The outlook was somewhat mixed. Most respondents 
said they expected business to improve over the rest of 
the year, but the toy maker said they would make signifi-
cant staff cuts if sales did not improve by August. 
Software and Information Technology Services 
Activity at software and IT services firms in the First 
District remained mostly stable throughout the most 
recent quarter. All firms reported significant declines in 
new bookings, but steady revenue from existing custom-
ers. The majority of firms expected to see flat to 2 per-
cent revenue growth, with another firm anticipating low 
double-digit growth year-over-year attributable to a cloud
-based software acquisition finalized earlier this year. 
Multiple firms noted that what recent demand they have 
seen, has mostly been for cloud-based product lines. 
Respondents were split in terms of optimism, with most 
remaining concerned regarding the U.S. economy. One 
medical technology contact noted that their elevated un-
certainty may linger through the end of the year as hos-
pitals remain focused on the pandemic. Contacts that re-
ported being more optimistic than last quarter generally 
cited increased demand for cloud-based services and in-
creased certainty regarding remote operations. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District has 
remained on pause because of COVID-19. Most con-
tacts reported an increase in sublease availability in the 
office leasing market. Most tenants were able to pay May 
and June rents, except for retail tenants who were hit 
hardest by the pandemic. Warehouses, grocery stores, 
and pharmacies were among the few robust leasing 
sectors. Across the region’s markets, investment sales 
activity was slow to nonexistent. All contacts expressed 
substantial concern about uncertainty. 
In the Boston area, few leasing transactions have oc-
curred. Vacancies increased in the Boston office market 
while the industrial leasing market was also quiet, except 
for warehouse leasing. In the Hartford area, there was 
little leasing activity; renewals represented the only office 
leasing market transactions. Hartford’s industrial leasing 
market for buildings over 25,000 square feet was rela-
tively active, but the market for smaller buildings was 
quiet. In the Providence area, leasing picked up slightly 
in recent weeks, but most transactions were time-
sensitive deals. The pandemic has worsened the histori-
cally quiet industrial leasing market in Providence, and 
contacts expected the availability rate to rise significantly 
in the near future. 
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District re-
mained slow through May as a result of the COVID-19 
pandemic. (All areas reported year-over-year changes 
from May 2019 to May 2020. Connecticut data were 
unavailable.) For both single family homes and condos, 
all reporting areas experienced double-digit decreases in 
closed sales compared to a year ago. Many contacts 
indicated they viewed this as a temporary pause in activ-
ity, saying people had delayed, rather than cancelled, 
their plans to buy or sell. Contacts across the region said 
they anticipate a busy summer as local economies begin 
to reopen and people who put their plans on hold be-
cause of the pandemic enter the market. However, they 
also expressed concern that further spread of the virus 
may cause market activity to slow again. 
Residential markets continued to favor sellers. Inventory 
dropped substantially in all reporting areas for both sin-
gle family homes and condos. At the same time, median 
sales prices increased in all areas except for Vermont 
and condo markets in Boston and Massachusetts. The 
New Hampshire representative noted “Buyers have been 
quicker to return to the housing market in force than 
sellers.” Eagerness among buyers to take advantage of 
exceptionally low mortgage rates is likely contributing to 
this dynamic. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Second District economy rebounded moderately in the latest reporting period, following a steep contraction, as the 
spread of the virus subsided and businesses began to reopen. Employment came off its lows across most industry 
sectors, while wages were steady, on balance. Input prices rose modestly, but selling prices were flat to down slightly 
overall. Activity showed signs of rebounding in most industry sectors, with the strongest bounce-backs seen in retail, 
wholesale trade, and manufacturing. Leisure & hospitality businesses also reported some improvement. Business con-
tacts have grown considerably more optimistic about the near-term outlook, though many businesses expressed con-
cern about PPP loans running out or not being forgiven. Consumer spending has been mixed, but, on balance, has 
rebounded substantially—especially for vehicles. In contrast, tourism and travel have remained depressed. Home sales 
and residential leasing activity have been sluggish, though some areas have seen a nascent pickup in June, as re-
strictions were eased. Commercial leasing and construction activity remained weak. Finally, banks reported increased 
demand for mortgages, mostly tighter credit standards, steady delinquency rates, and ongoing widespread leniency on 
existing loans. 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has improved slightly, as businesses 
have begun to recall workers and some have added new 
workers. Most pandemic-related layoffs are still consid-
ered to be temporary, though one employment agency in 
upstate New York noted that some previously furloughed 
workers have more recently been laid off permanently. 
That agency along with another in New York City noted 
that hiring has remained sluggish. A number of contacts 
at firms providing various business and office services 
have reduced staffing levels, hours, and salaries. On 
balance, though, business contacts indicate that their 
staffing levels have rebounded at least moderately from 
the lows seen during the spring. 
Some businesses have noted ongoing challenges in 
both bringing back furloughed workers and hiring new 
ones. Among the factors deterring workers are child care 
needs, safety concerns, and the generosity of unemploy-
ment benefits under the CARES Act. 
Looking ahead, business contacts in most industries 
plan to increase staffing levels, on balance, in the 
months ahead. However, the information and profession-
al & business service sectors, which had relatively mild 
layoffs, did not plan to expand staff overall.  
Wages have generally been steady in recent weeks. 
One employment agency noted that wages have risen 
for lower-paid workers, whereas many businesses have 
cut salaries for managers and other highly-paid workers. 
Looking ahead, businesses generally expect wages to 
rise, on balance, though not in the business services, 
information, or leisure & hospitality sectors.  
Prices  
Business contacts reported that input costs were up 
modestly, on balance, while selling prices were flat to 
down slightly. A sizable number noted mostly modest 
costs related to installing and maintaining safety proto-
cols. The most widespread cost pressures were reported 
by education & health and leisure & hospitality firms. 
Trends in selling prices varied widely across sectors. 
Contacts in professional & business services, leisure & 
hospitality, and financial services noted fairly widespread 
price cuts, while those in other sectors noted stable 
selling prices. Notably, retail and leisure & hospitality 
firms generally expected to raise prices in the months 
ahead.   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported that sales remained soft in May but 
many noted a pickup in June, as restrictions on non-
The Beige Book Ŷ July 2020 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
essential stores began to ease. While shifts to online 
sales and curbside pickup have boosted business, over-
all sales have remained well below pre-pandemic levels. 
One upstate New York mall noted that many of its stores 
have remained closed due to tighter restrictions on 
stores without exterior entrances. Retailers expected 
sales to continue to improve gradually in the months 
ahead. 
Vehicle sales have rebounded fairly sharply in May and 
June, according to dealers in upstate New York, though 
they remained somewhat below comparable 2019 levels. 
Contacts expressed concern that lean inventories of both 
new and used vehicles may constrain sales through the 
summer. 
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturing and wholesale trade activity have picked 
up modestly, while transportation & warehousing busi-
ness has remained weak. New York State and New 
Jersey lifted restrictions on manufacturing and distribu-
tion businesses earlier than for most other sectors. 
Looking ahead, manufacturers and wholesalers ex-
pressed increased optimism, while transportation & 
warehousing contacts were modestly optimistic. Capital 
spending plans of manufacturers have picked up a bit, 
but service firms have scaled back plans substantially.   
Services 
Service industry contacts reported some pickup in busi-
ness but noted that activity has remained well below pre-
pandemic levels. Contacts in leisure & hospitality and 
transportation—the hardest hit sectors during the pan-
demic—have noted scattered signs of improvement, 
though safety concerns have inhibited demand. Moreo-
ver, capacity and other restrictions on restaurants and 
retail consumer services have limited capacity. Tourism 
has remained moribund, with hotels and airlines continu-
ing to see business at well under half of capacity. 
Health and education service providers report ongoing 
weakness in business and were not generally optimistic 
about the near-term outlook. Activity has also remained 
depressed in the information and professional & busi-
ness services sectors, as many business customers 
have cut back on such services. There is widespread 
concern about when such business will rebound.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales markets across the District have been 
mixed, with New York City’s sales and rental markets 
sluggish but some markets in less urban areas and in 
upstate New York showing strength. In New York City, 
closings were down more than 50 percent from a year 
earlier, while new contract signings were down roughly 
75 percent. However, a local real estate authority noted 
a nascent surge in activity in late June—as restrictions 
were lifted—and expected Q3 to be quite active due to 
pent up demand and increased supply. The City’s resi-
dential rental market has weakened due to a combina-
tion of very little new leasing and a number of tenants 
not renewing. Both prices and rents appear to be down 
from pre-pandemic levels, though there is some uncer-
tainty due to low volume. 
In other parts of the District, however, there have been 
signs of strengthening housing demand—particularly in 
the market for second homes. Activity across much of 
New York State picked up substantially when restrictions 
were lifted in early June, and demand appears to have 
exceeded supply driving higher prices and bidding wars 
across parts of the region. 
Commercial real estate markets across the District re-
main weak, with availability rates rising, rents flat or 
declining, and leasing activity very sluggish. Many retail 
tenants have continued to fall behind on rent—
particularly in malls, where restrictions have stayed in 
place. Still, real estate contacts remained somewhat 
optimistic, on balance, about the near term outlook. 
New construction activity has remained quite sluggish, 
though many ongoing construction projects have begun 
to start up again, as restrictions have been eased.  
Banking and Finance 
Contacts in the finance sector generally noted continued 
weak business but have grown somewhat more optimis-
tic in their expectations for the months ahead. Small to 
medium-sized banks in the District reported higher de-
mand for residential and commercial mortgages, lower 
demand for commercial & industrial loans, and un-
changed demand for consumer loans. Refinancing activi-
ty has also increased. Bankers reported easing credit 
standards on consumer loans, but widespread tightening 
in credit standards across other categories. Spreads 
reportedly narrowed on all loan categories except com-
mercial mortgages. Delinquency rates generally re-
mained stable, and lenders reported more lenient poli-
cies for delinquent accounts across all categories.  Ŷ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regionalǦeconomy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Third District business activity expanded moderately during the current Beige Book period but remained far below levels 
observed prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Business operations resumed or increased, as lower COVID-19 
caseloads prompted states to phase out stay-at-home orders and mandated closures. As firms recalled some of their 
workforce, net employment also grew moderately; however, firms continued to issue permanent layoffs as well. More 
firms have noted salary reductions than increases. Meanwhile, contacts noted difficulties attracting workers despite high 
unemployment rates. Prices edged higher, as a fitful economic restart generated spotty price spikes. Modestly positive 
expectations for growth over the next six months have broadened among firms; however, uncertainty remains high, as 
contacts cite the duration of the pandemic and the depth of the ensuing recession as key unknowns. 
Employment and Wages  
As firms reopened and recalled workers, overall employ-
ment rebounded moderately. However, these net gains 
masked a small, steady stream of permanent layoffs. By 
mid-June, a modest percentage of firms reported that 
employment had declined over the month. Since then, 
an average of 11 percent of the firms in our weekly sur-
veys reported that they had recalled furloughed workers 
in the prior week; 19 percent had hired new workers – 
sometimes to replace those who would not return to 
work. Meanwhile about 6 percent of the firms reported 
that they had furloughed workers, and another 4 percent 
reported that they had laid off workers permanently.  
Staffing firms reported that activity was increasing but 
remained off pre-pandemic levels – sometimes as much 
as 40 percent. Despite elevated unemployment rates, 
firms often described the labor market as tight. By late 
June, almost half of the firms in our weekly survey re-
ported that they faced no impediments to hiring workers. 
However, the remainder did note challenges.  
Among nonmanufacturing firms, an equal 30 percent 
share of the contacts noted fear of infection, childcare 
needs, and expanded unemployment insurance (UI) 
benefits, respectively, as impediments. According to 
manufacturers, their workers tended to be less con-
cerned about the virus but more attracted to the UI bene-
fits than their nonmanufacturing counterparts. In the 
Philadelphia metro area, contacts noted reluctance from 
their transit-dependent workers to return to work or end 
telecommuting.  
Wages appeared to trend slightly downward. In mid-
June, the percentage of nonmanufacturing firms report-
ing lower wage and benefit costs was slightly higher than 
the percentage reporting higher costs. To trim expenses, 
more firms noted cutting salaries (with or without cutting 
hours). Most firms ended or were phasing out pay premi-
ums to attract and retain frontline workers. Staffing firms 
noted that the lowest wage rates were holding steady, or 
rising slightly, but observed that clients, especially in 
parts of Pennsylvania, were still shifting their firm’s wage 
structure toward a market-driven minimum that is about 
double the state minimum wage.  
Prices  
On balance, more contacts reported higher prices rather 
than lower during the period, except for prices received 
by nonmanufacturers. However, well over half of all firms 
noted no change in prices.  
Rising prices were most often described as spotty, rather 
than general. Firms noted price spikes for disparate 
items, such as ground beef and food service containers. 
Contacts cited disruptions in the market’s normal supply 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
and demand relationships, plus supply chain disruptions, 
including transport logistics, as factors.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported a modest rebound in activity 
during the current period. At mid-June, over 40 percent 
of the firms reported increases in shipments and in new 
orders, while about 20 percent reported declines. When 
asked to estimate their total production changes, the 
median firm response was 25–30 percent lower for the 
second quarter compared with the first quarter of the 
year.  
In our weekly survey, manufacturing firms began the 
period with sales and new orders of about 30 percent 
below what had been anticipated pre-pandemic. At the 
end of June, firms reported estimated demand about 18 
percent below expectations.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales rebounded moderately. 
However, the gains were distributed unevenly among 
retailers and restaurants. Some businesses have closed 
and some survivors have been picking up the market 
share the former leaves behind, but nearly all survivors 
report working harder to maintain a profit margin.  
Sales of new and used cars rebounded moderately 
during the period. Some Pennsylvania dealers noted 
record sales for June but acknowledged that some of 
those sales may reflect pent-up demand.  
Tourism has rebounded sharply in beach areas and 
mountain resorts for businesses that are permitted to 
reopen. Business travel and urban destinations remain 
largely inactive. Overall, activity remains more than 50 
percent below prior-year levels.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, nonmanufacturers reported a moderate 
rebound in activity, but the activity remains well below 
pre-pandemic expectations. In our weekly survey, report-
ed demand of nonmanufacturing firms had already im-
proved from an early-April low of 48 percent below pre- 
pandemic expectations to 30 percent below at mid-May. 
By the end of June, firms reported estimated demand 
was 22 percent below expectations. 
Financial Services 
The volume of bank lending held steady over the period 
in contrast to the same period in 2019, in which loan 
volumes grew moderately. Commercial and industrial 
loans, residential mortgages, and auto loans grew mod-
erately during the period, and commercial real estate 
lending grew modestly. However, these gains were 
offset by moderate declines in home equity lines and 
other consumer loans. Credit card volumes also fell 
moderately.  
Banking contacts noted generally increased optimism 
among their clients – that Paycheck Protection Program 
loans, loan deferrals, and other assistance had support-
ed many businesses well. However, one banker cau-
tioned against a false sense of security. Most bankers 
noted that the third and fourth quarters will tell, as defer-
rals run out and businesses must begin to meet their 
loan obligations. As of late May, 16 percent of the firms 
in our weekly survey indicated that they were very con-
cerned about maintaining solvency; 22 percent were 
somewhat concerned.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported steadily improving traffic and 
sales that reached a moderate pace of growth. Contacts 
cited various contributing factors, including low interest 
rates, a desire for more elbow room, pent-up demand 
from prior months, and a lack of the usual competition 
from May/June weddings and graduations.  
Existing home sales may have increased slightly. Al-
though year-over-year sales in May were down sharply, 
pending contracts had improved. Real estate contacts 
reported that early estimates of June sales were strong-
er, but that recent gains may reflect pent-up demand 
from months during the shutdown.  
Philadelphia’s commercial real estate construction grew 
modestly from low levels as more projects restarted. An 
engineering firm noted that many municipal projects 
have been shelved, as tax revenues and tolls have fall-
en. Commercial leasing activity continued to decline 
modestly, as firms are taking more time to reassess their 
space needs. Some firms will extend leases when possi-
ble to afford more time to understand the changes 
wrought by the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for their 
products, their workforce efficiency, and telecommuting’s 
long-term potential. Demand for retail space is in sharper 
decline. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
After declining sharply in March and April, the Fourth District economy expanded in recent weeks as some firms re-
sumed business operations. Contacts across most industry segments reported a rebound in activity during the early 
phases of reopening, although many suggested that the pace of improvement slowed as the reopening progressed. 
Most were also careful to point out that demand remained well below pre-pandemic levels despite the recent gains. 
Looking forward, contacts generally expected activity to pick up further in coming months. However, some questioned 
the sustainability of the pace of recovery amid a spike in new COVID cases across the country along with weak new 
orders and declining backlogs in some key industries. That uncertainty likely contributed to softness in capital spending 
and hiring plans. More than 40 percent of contacts cut capital spending plans since the last report, while less than 10 
percent planned to spend more. Contacts across a wide array of industries indicated they were bringing idled workers 
back only slowly, and are unlikely to rehire all of them in the near term. Wages, nonlabor costs, and selling prices were 
generally flat-to-down.  
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand remained soft across most industry seg-
ments even as more of the District’s economy came 
back on line. Half of contacts reported that staffing levels 
had not changed over the past two months, while the 
share reporting staff reductions was slightly larger than 
the share that reporting staff additions. Firms indicated 
that weak demand for their goods and services was the 
primary factor constraining hiring, but contacts also 
suggested that hiring was inhibited by workers’ persis-
tent fears of contracting the virus, a lack of child care, 
and generous unemployment insurance benefits. 
Wages remained mostly flat as nearly three-quarters of 
contacts reported no change in the past two months. 
Many firms instituted formal pay freezes at the onset of 
the pandemic, while others temporarily put off merit 
increases until they were more confident in the sustaina-
bility of the recovery. More firms reportedly cut worker 
pay since the last report (particularly for higher salaried 
employees) and asked workers to take unpaid leave. 
Where wage increases were noted, contacts indicated 
that they were due to increased overtime and bonuses or 
COVID-related “hazard” pay.   
 
Prices  
Nonlabor input costs were flat to down since the last 
report. Manufacturers reported that prices for important 
inputs such as steel and petroleum-related products 
were mostly flat to down in recent weeks amid weak 
global demand and excess inventories, while freight 
haulers indicated that lower fuel prices had offset higher 
insurance costs. Contacts generally expected nonlabor 
costs to move higher in coming months as the economic 
recovery proceeds. With weak demand and little upward 
pressure on wages and other input costs, selling prices 
were mostly flat-to-down as well. Contacts in retail, 
transportation, and professional and business services 
were more likely to report increases in selling prices than 
those in manufacturing and construction. Still, the price 
increases were not material and often reversed declines 
recorded in previous periods.   
Consumer Spending 
Retail spending increased for most contacts since the 
previous report, although it was still below the pre-
pandemic level. Automotive and apparel contacts gener-
ally indicated that demand had increased more than 
expected early in the reopening, and one tourism contact 
noted that hotel room bookings edged up as youth sports 
activity resumed. Some restaurants found success by 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
continuing to focus on carryout and delivery even as dine
-in restrictions were eased. However, some retailers 
have experienced very little recovery since the initial 
shutdown, and rising COVID cases have forced restau-
rants in a few areas to curb operations again. Overall, 
contacts are cautiously optimistic that consumer spend-
ing will continue to recover in coming months.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing conditions improved modestly since the 
last report. Contacts indicated that manufacturing output 
reached its trough in mid-April and has been increasing 
since then. Firms that experienced an uptick in demand 
attributed this increase to more of their customers re-
suming operations, particularly in the District’s auto 
industry. Despite the general improvement, demand 
remained below pre-pandemic levels overall and was 
particularly weak in the District’s aerospace sector. 
Moreover, several contacts indicated that new orders 
were uneven and failed to keep pace with shipments, 
leading to shrinking backlogs. Nearly two-thirds of con-
tacts expected demand to increase in the coming 
months, yet more than half suggested that they had 
decreased planned capital expenditures in order to pre-
serve cash.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Overall construction activity stabilized since our last 
report. However, conditions varied widely under the 
surface and contacts expressed concerns about the 
sustainability of the industry’s recovery. Homebuilders 
reported stronger-than-expected new-home sales in May 
and June as buyers returned to the market as social 
distancing restrictions were eased. In addition, low mort-
gage interest rates encouraged undecided buyers to “get 
off the fence.” Residential realtors suggested that de-
mand for existing properties was robust as well, but a 
shortage of listings constrained sales. Both builders and 
realtors expected demand for single-family properties to 
remain firm in the near term, but several worried that 
conditions could change in the fall if high unemployment 
persists. 
Nonresidential construction rebounded as delayed pro-
jects in some areas were restarted. However, several 
nonresidential builders indicated that there were few new 
projects entering the pipeline and that backlogs were 
being worked down, raising concerns that activity may 
weaken in the fall. Meanwhile, nonresidential real estate 
activity remained weak. Commercial realtors reported 
that overall demand for space was flat to down as soft-
ness in office and retail more than offset some strength 
in light industrial. Landlords continued to express con-
cerns about cash flow as more of their tenants, particu-
larly small businesses, come under financial strain.   
Financial Services 
Bankers reported that overall activity was slowly return-
ing to normal in recent weeks. Contacts suggested that 
demand for business loans, particularly Paycheck Pro-
tection Program (PPP) loans, slowed substantially after 
large increases in March and April. One large regional 
bank reported that customers who had drawn down 
existing credit lines and revolving loans had begun to 
pay those loans back more quickly than anticipated. 
Deposit levels remained elevated as clients held on to 
cash from preemptive line-of-credit drawdowns, dis-
bursements of PPP loans, and government stimulus 
checks. Most contacts reported that delinquency rates 
remained relatively low, but several expressed concern 
that delinquencies may increase when PPP funds run 
out and government-provided assistance diminishes. 
Demand for purchase mortgages increased as stay-at-
home orders were eased, and mortgage refinancing 
activity remained high.    
Professional and Business Services 
Activity in professional and business services increased 
at a modest pace since the previous report, although it 
remained muted compared to a year earlier. As busi-
nesses continued to reopen, demand for payroll and 
other administrative services was returning, as was 
demand for marketing services. Technology companies 
that focus on work from home solutions have also seen 
an increase in demand as businesses prepare for possi-
ble future disruptions. Optimism increased significantly 
among contacts in the technology industry, as business-
es will likely require many third party services in order to 
thrive in the “new normal” work environment.  
Freight 
The vast majority of transportation contacts reported an 
increase in freight demand in recent weeks. This pickup 
coincides with a resumption of manufacturing activity in 
the District as well as continued gains in shipments from 
grocers. One contact said that demand from grocers was 
40 percent higher than prior to the pandemic, which 
offset weaker demand from some other sectors. By 
contrast, a few haulers were forced to accept below-cost 
shipments to maintain cash flow. Looking forward, two-
thirds of transportation contacts expected demand to 
increase in coming months. At the same time, many 
were concerned about the potential for a second wave of 
COVID-related shutdowns which may disrupt shipments 
later in the summer and into the fall. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
clevelandfed.org/region  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy grew compared to our prior report, although economic activity generally remained well below 
pre-COVID-19 levels. Manufacturers experienced a slight uptick in new orders but shipments of finished goods were 
little changed. Ports reported modest declines in both imports and exports. Trucking companies, on the other hand, 
indicated a modest increase in demand as the reopening of stores and restaurants spurred new shipments. Retail shop-
ping picked up modestly as more stores were able to reopen, but sales remained below year-ago levels. Leisure travel 
and tourism activity increased moderately, particularly at drivable locations. Business travel, in contrast, remained de-
pressed. Residential home sales increased despite a low inventory of existing homes. Commercial real estate leasing 
rose modestly, overall, due to strong demand for industrial space. Bankers reported a slight increase in lending, pre-
dominately loans for home purchases and mortgage refinancing. On balance, demand for nonfinancial services declined 
moderately. Employment rose moderately in recent weeks as many firms called back previously furloughed or laid-off 
workers; however, total employment remained well below pre-pandemic levels. Price growth increased modestly, over-
all. Prices for some goods, like personal protection equipment, rose sharply due to supply chain disruptions and high 
demand.    
Employment and Wages  
Since our previous report, employment increased as 
firms across a wide variety of industries reported calling 
some of their previously separated employees back to 
work, hiring new workers, and posting for vacant posi-
tions. Despite the rise in employment in recent weeks, 
total employment remained considerably below pre-
pandemic levels. Several contacts noted challenges 
bringing workers back, including fear of contracting 
COVID-19 at work, inability to find childcare, or their 
ability to make more money on unemployment. While 
most firms reported no changes to wages or salaries, a 
few said that they cut hourly wages to reduce costs.   
Prices  
On balance, price growth picked up modestly in recent 
weeks. According to our most recent surveys, manufac-
turers reported a slight increase in both prices paid and 
prices received while services sector firms reported a 
moderate increase in both price measures. One service 
firm noted that supply chain disruptions and high de-
mand for personal protection equipment led to a sub-
stantial increase in prices for those goods.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing conditions in the Fifth District were little 
changed since our previous report. Shipments were 
fairly steady, and new orders increased slightly. Howev-
er, lost revenue forced some manufacturers to cut budg-
ets and discretionary spending as well as cancel capital 
spending projects. Customers who were unable to pay 
for products created additional stress for manufacturers. 
Payroll Protection Program (PPP) loans allowed some 
companies to remain solvent. One firm that contracts 
with government agencies expressed concerns about 
government budget changes in the wake of the virus. 
Some firms were able to offset losses, by shifting pro-
duction to COVID-related goods such as medical sup-
plies or sneeze guards.  
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports experienced modest declines in ship-
ping volumes in both exports and imports in recent 
weeks. On the import side, declines were seen in home 
furnishings, autos, and engine parts, while apparel and 
medical supplies showed some strengthening. Port 
contacts attributed some of the weakness in exports to 
supply chain disruptions. One port lost business as large 
retailers closed, eliminating distribution centers. Ports 
saw some canceled calls, although not as many as in the 
last few months. An airport operator said cargo flights 
had increased to partially offset the decline in cargo 
space from the reduction in passenger flights. 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Trucking companies in the Fifth District reported a mod-
erate increase in demand since our last report. Contacts 
noted increased shipments of retail goods and wine as 
stores and restaurants reopened. Shipments of food, 
cleaning supplies, and home-improvement goods re-
mained strong. Some businesses reported lingering 
softness as shipments were still below last year. Howev-
er, one company had more freight than it could haul and 
looked to expand its fleet, while others continued capital 
expansion plans in order to be well-positioned upon full 
recovery. Spot market activity picked up, and most 
customers who had temporarily shut down reopened.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retailers reported that business picked up modestly in 
recent weeks as more stores were able to reopen, but 
demand remained below the level of a year ago. Several 
companies struggled as supply chain disruptions led to 
low inventories. In particular, automobile dealers report-
ed that manufacturer shutdowns led to low inventories of 
new cars, which boosted sales of used cars.  In addition, 
the supply of used cars increased as rental companies 
closed and corporations sold their excess fleet vehicles. 
Some retailers also experienced soft demand, and one 
store expressed concerns that closures of nearby res-
taurants would hurt business. However, others, such as 
grocers, hardware stores, and consumer appliance and 
electronics stores, had strong sales, and some faced 
higher demand than they could meet. 
Travel and tourism improved moderately since our last 
report but were soft compared to last year. Hotels and 
vacation rentals in some areas reported high occupan-
cy, spurred by leisure travel, particularly in the drivable 
market. However, business travel remained low, and 
event venues were hit by lack of conventions, which 
they anticipated would hurt business for some time. 
Meanwhile, restaurants continued to struggle as they 
operated at reduced capacity, and some shut down 
because of virus spikes or fear of vandalism. Attractions, 
theaters, and performing arts groups struggled as many 
remained closed and those that opened had soft de-
mand.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Fifth District home sales increased modestly since our 
last report. Realtors said business picked up after some 
softness in recent months. Contacts reported that de-
mand exceeded supply, partially because listings were 
low, as people were still reluctant to show their homes. 
Days on the market decreased, and low interest rates 
boosted sales. Realtors noted particularly strong de-
mand for lower priced homes, but low listings caused 
some customers to shop in higher price ranges than 
they had originally planned. New construction continued, 
but starts were delayed due to the remote work and 
distancing policies of local agencies. 
Commercial real estate leasing increased modestly but 
remained soft compared to pre-pandemic levels. Rental 
rates were somewhat lower, but contacts said buyers 
were not getting the low prices they expected. Retail 
remained weak as some stores and restaurants closed 
permanently. Office leasing was modest, and several 
tenants asked for short-term lease renewals in order to 
allow them to re-evaluate their use of and need for office 
space. Industrial leasing remained strong, and one bro-
ker expected a continued rise in industrial leasing to 
allow companies to hold more inventory. Multifamily 
leasing was somewhat soft, and some landlords in-
creased concessions to attract tenants.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan activity picked up slightly for this period. 
Respondents reported higher residential mortgage 
growth and strong demand for mortgage refinancing. On 
balance, conventional commercial lending declined 
moderately, although demand improved slightly in Fifth 
District states that reopened earlier. Auto lending re-
mained below year-ago levels. Deposit growth continued 
to be strong, despite lower rates on interest-bearing 
accounts, driven mainly by proceeds from federal aid 
disbursements. Delinquency rates remained low, but a 
few financial institutions reported being more cautious in 
terms of their underwriting in light of the pandemic.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms reported moderate declines 
in demand and revenues in recent weeks. Several con-
tacts who engaged in business to business services, 
such as consulting, employee training, and marketing, 
said that their clients have reduced spending as a result 
of their own revenue declines. A few others said that 
revenue was down because they could not attend con-
ventions and events, which typically generate new busi-
ness for them. Lastly, an executive from a firm that pro-
vides services to federal government agencies ex-
pressed concerns that budget cuts would result in re-
duced demand in 2021 after current contracts expired. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/data_analysis 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, economic activity in the Sixth District remained weak from mid-May through June. Labor markets improved 
somewhat as businesses in parts of the region reopened. Nonlabor costs remained subdued. Reports from retailers 
noted strong consumer demand and increased sales of automobiles. Tourism contacts reported that attractions and 
hotels had begun to reopen, but revenues and employment levels were expected to be constrained by mandated capac-
ity limits. Demand for residential real estate strengthened and inventory levels fell resulting in upward pressure on home 
prices. Commercial real estate market conditions were mixed. Manufacturing activity declined, and reports on new 
orders were mixed. Financial institutions reported a deterioration in conditions as COVID-19 impacted some firms’ cred-
it. Overall commercial loan growth was slow and consumer lending remained soft. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor conditions improved modestly since the previous 
report. Some firms reported slowly recalling workers and 
increasing hours as demand increased, while others 
remained in a holding pattern. Many of those bringing 
employees back indicated staffing was not back to pre-
pandemic levels. While some employers reported taking 
measures to cut less productive processes and employ-
ees, others were able to acquire more skilled and pro-
ductive staff due to greater talent availability. Although 
some remote workers returned to the office, many firms 
indicated success with remote arrangements and noted 
they will continue this stance for the near term and possi-
bly beyond. Some employers remained committed to 
maintaining employment levels and plan to reduce 
hours, wages, and possibly benefits to maintain those 
levels; however, most indicated that demand will deter-
mine staffing levels in the second half of the year. As the 
support from the Paycheck Protection Program winds 
down, many employers indicated that they will be forced 
to lay off workers should business remain weak.  
Contacts continued to report wage and salary cuts, 
except at the low-end of the pay scale and among es-
sential workers. Reports on the disincentive to work from 
receiving unemployment insurance benefits were mixed. 
 
 
Prices  
Contacts continued to note muted input costs and little to  
no pricing power. Though many described rising costs 
associated with sanitation practices and Personal Pro-
tective Equipment used to protect employees and clients 
from COVID-19, most reported an inability to pass along 
these additional costs. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Infla-
tion Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit 
costs remained steady, on average, at 1.2 percent in 
June. Year-ahead expectations increased somewhat to 
1.7 percent. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Retailers reported healthy demand as many stores reo-
pened. While some noted that there was still uncertainty 
clouding their outlook, expectations are for sales and 
margins to improve over the remainder of the year. Auto 
dealers reported increased sales activity since the last 
report.  
Tourism and hospitality contacts noted that they have 
begun to reopen hotels and attractions in accordance to 
recommended guidelines. However, business capacity 
will be constrained by social distancing requirements 
which will continue to negatively impact both revenue 
and employment. 
Construction and Real Estate 
District housing market conditions improved significantly 
over the reporting period. Pent-up demand and low 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
interest rates accelerated home sales. In many markets, 
home inventories contracted significantly, creating strong 
upward pressure on home prices. Despite low interest 
rates, affordability remained a concern as median home 
prices continued to reach new highs in several markets. 
The limited supply of existing homes increased demand 
for new homes. 30-day delinquencies rose sharply, 
especially in South Florida markets, despite a surge in 
forbearances.  
Commercial real estate (CRE) contacts reported contin-
ued challenges associated with the effects of the COVID
-19 pandemic. Hard hit sectors like retail and hospitality 
reported some stabilization as local economies reo-
pened; lower-price point hotel brands saw improvements 
in occupancies and values from record lows in May 
through early June. Multifamily owners reported minor 
softening in occupancies and were offering greater con-
cessions to minimize lease turnovers. There were grow-
ing reports of tenants and borrowers seeking relief. 
Investment activity was muted compared with pre-
COVID-19 levels. Contacts reported that capital was 
readily available at banks; however, underwriting criteria 
tightened for the financing of operating CRE projects, 
and originations continued at a subpar pace. Contacts 
reported that high-quality asset values declined margin-
ally, and hospitality and retail sector assets declined at a 
more accelerated pace since the beginning of the pan-
demic. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts indicated that overall business 
activity decelerated, but at a somewhat slower pace than 
the previous report. While most firms reported decreases 
in new orders and production levels, a modest rise in 
new orders was noted by a few contacts. Purchasing 
managers suggested that supplier delivery times were 
getting longer as some supply chain disruptions contin-
ued. Contacts also cited a decline in finished inventory 
levels. Expectations for future production levels declined, 
with only one-fifth of contacts expecting higher produc-
tion levels over the next six months. 
Transportation 
Transportation activity was largely unchanged since the 
previous report. Class I railroads saw slight improve-
ments in volumes; however, total rail traffic remained 
substantially weak. Short-line railroads noted declines in 
shipments of autos and increases in aggregates and 
building materials. Ports experienced a significant reduc-
tion in auto imports and container traffic was down. 
Inland barge companies cited modest improvements in 
demand, but movements of energy products were soft as 
refineries continued to operate below capacity. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions deteriorated over the 
reporting period due to credit issues related to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Provisions for loan loss reserves 
increased significantly for most institutions, in prepara-
tion for increased charge-offs once forbearance periods 
end, exerting downward pressure on earnings. Addition-
ally, lower short-term interest rates further compressed 
net interest rate margins. Loan growth remained muted 
with most centered on approvals of new loans under the 
Paycheck Protection Program. Except for first lien resi-
dential mortgages, consumer loan growth was flat partly 
due to tightening credit standards. Liquidity remained 
healthy as deposit levels increased. 
Energy  
Energy industry contacts continued to report weak de-
mand, oversupply, and constrained global storage ca-
pacity for crude oil, liquefied natural gas, and refined 
products such as distillates. Oil and gas producers noted 
that they expect U.S. oil production to take one to two 
years to return to pre-COVID-19 levels. Fuel distributors 
reported little to no demand from municipalities, transit 
authorities, school systems, and airlines, while demand 
from food wholesalers and grocers remained solid. Utili-
ties in the region indicated that reductions in demand 
were not as large as anticipated in the first quarter. While 
utilities contacts noted that planned capital investments 
will continue through 2021, other energy sectors report-
ed delayed or cancelled projects, cuts to budgets, and 
layoffs, some permanent, over the same period. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained weak. Mostly drought-
free conditions prevailed. On a month-over-month basis, 
June’s production forecast for Florida's orange crop was 
down from the previous month and last year, while Flori-
da’s grapefruit production forecast was down from the 
previous month but remained ahead of last year. The 
USDA reported that in May, year-over-year prices paid to 
farmers were up for rice, soybeans, and eggs but down 
for corn, cotton, cattle, broilers, and milk. On a month-
over-month basis, prices increased for cotton, rice, cat-
tle, and broilers but decreased for corn, soybeans, eggs, 
and milk. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased strongly in late May and June, but remained well below its pre-
pandemic level. Contacts expected further growth in activity in the coming months, but most did not expect a full recov-
ery until at least the second half of 2021. Employment, consumer spending, and manufacturing increased substantially, 
while business spending and construction and real estate activity increased modestly. Wages edged up, prices declined 
slightly, and financial conditions deteriorated modestly. The pandemic continued to weigh on agriculture incomes. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased substantially from a very low 
level over the reporting period, with gains spread widely 
across industries. Many contacts who received a 
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loan continued to 
indicate that the program was helping them avoid layoffs. 
A number of contacts said that their ability to retain 
workers after the PPP money ran out depended heavily 
on future demand. Manufacturers facing slowdowns 
reported further use of downtime to carry out mainte-
nance or do productivity enhancing projects. Some auto 
dealers reported selling a large number of vehicles while 
employing far fewer workers. Several contacts again 
commented that generous unemployment benefits were 
making it difficult to bring payrolls back to desired levels. 
Wages edged up across skill levels. Benefits costs also 
ticked up. 
Prices 
Prices declined slightly overall in late May and June, 
though contacts expected modest increases over the 
next 12 months. Retail prices decreased modestly on 
balance. There were noticeable declines for apparel, but 
food and beverage prices rose, particularly for beef. 
Producer prices edged down. Input prices were largely 
unchanged, with the exception of shipping costs, which 
increased modestly. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased substantially as many 
establishments were permitted to reopen. The rebound 
generally exceeded contacts’ expectations. Nonauto 
retailers saw gains in all sectors. Contacts noted that the 
home improvement, home furnishings, food and bever-
age, and sporting goods sectors continued to be strong. 
Apparel was selling, but only with very generous promo-
tions. Vehicle sales moved up sharply, and dealerships’ 
service departments continued to work through backlogs 
that had built up while stay-at-home orders were in 
place. Contacts reported large increases in boat and RV 
sales. Most contacts in the leisure and hospitality sector 
were open, but sales remained well below pre-
coronavirus levels. For example, casinos in Iowa were 
allowed to reopen at 50 percent capacity, a level that 
reportedly matched demand. In contrast, movie theaters 
in most of Michigan were required to stay closed. Con-
tacts expressed great uncertainty about the path of 
consumer spending over the rest of the year, especially 
for the holiday season. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in late May and 
June. Retail inventories were generally above desired 
levels, particularly for apparel, though there were reports 
of low inventories of light trucks, boats, and RVs. A 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
number of manufacturers said that inventories were 
higher than desired. Capital expenditures increased 
slightly, but many contacts continued to say they had 
pulled back on spending plans for the year. Contacts 
again indicated they were making major changes in work 
environments to protect employees against the corona-
virus, but noted cost offsets from lower travel and enter-
tainment spending. Freight transportation increased 
modestly, but remained at a low level. Commercial and 
industrial energy consumption increased moderately, 
with the largest growth in manufacturing. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased modestly 
on balance over the reporting period, but remained sub-
dued. Residential construction decreased slightly. One 
contact reported a pullback in speculative single-family 
construction. Residential real estate activity increased 
moderately from a very low level, with gains concentrat-
ed in the starter home segment. Contacts continued to 
report that low inventories were supporting prices. Non-
residential construction decreased slightly on net, with 
much of the activity representing work on projects in 
progress before the pandemic. Commercial real estate 
activity was little changed and the market remains highly 
distressed. Industrial properties had the highest percent-
age of on time rent payments, while many tenants in the 
retail, restaurant, and hospitality sectors had asked for 
forbearance through at least the end of the summer. 
Retail and restaurant store closures were reportedly 
accelerating. Rents moved down, while vacancies and 
sublease space increased. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased strongly in late May 
and June, but remained well below where it was before 
the pandemic began. Auto production increased very 
sharply from a very low level as both assemblers and 
suppliers reopened. However, some contacts in the 
industry were concerned that the rising number of 
COVID-19 cases in parts of the US could result in new 
plant shutdowns. Steel production increased moderately, 
led by increased demand from the auto and oil and gas 
industries. Demand for heavy machinery picked up, but 
remained weak. Orders from specialty metals manufac-
turers increased moderately on balance, with reports of 
steady demand from the defense sector and increases 
from the medical and food manufacturing sectors. Manu-
facturers of building materials reported a moderate in-
crease in shipments. 
 
 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions deteriorated modestly during the 
reporting period. Participants in the equity and bond 
markets reported little change in prices on net, but vola-
tility remained elevated. Business loan demand de-
creased moderately as activity related to the PPP 
slowed. Many contacts reported large increases in busi-
nesses’ cash deposits. Contacts said there was some 
interest in the Federal Reserve’s Main Street Lending 
Program, but that many businesses had access to 
cheaper credit elsewhere. Business loan quality deterio-
rated moderately, particularly in the leisure and hospitali-
ty, commercial real estate, and health care sectors. 
Contacts noted that deferrals and the PPP had helped 
prevent delinquencies for many clients. One contact said 
that most clients appeared to have sufficient liquidity to 
make it into the fall. Business loan standards again 
tightened moderately. Consumer loan demand de-
creased modestly, though demand for mortgage refi-
nancing remained strong. Loan quality again deteriorat-
ed slightly. Contacts noted that delinquencies were 
limited because they were granting deferrals. One con-
tact said that roughly half of their deferrals had been to 
households that may struggle to resume loan payments 
once the current 60 to 90 day deferral period was over. 
Consumer loan standards tightened modestly. 
Agriculture 
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to weigh on agricul-
ture incomes. That said, farm incomes received a boost 
from some commodity price increases and CARES Act 
payments. Corn and soybean prices moved up after a 
USDA report that the number of corn acres planted was 
smaller than expected. Following a smooth planting 
season, corn and soybean crops were off to an excellent 
start. Specialty crops were also in decent shape. Meat 
production rebounded to levels near that of a year ago 
as packing plants reopened and began running extra 
shifts. Nevertheless, contacts reported a large backlog of 
hogs to slaughter. Cattle and hog prices fell and were 
below year ago levels. Milk prices at the farm gate 
stayed below last year’s levels in spite of some upward 
movement in dairy prices. Cheese demand surged, 
pushing prices to high levels. Ethanol margins widened, 
but some facilities remained closed and others were 
operating below full capacity. Demand for sites to locate 
renewable energy assets, recreational ground, and rural 
housing helped keep farmland values mostly stable. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity has rebounded sharply since late May; however, overall conditions remain significantly depressed and 
the pace of recovery appears to have slowed since mid-June. Contacts reported reopening and bringing back fur-
loughed workers, but the pace has been uneven across firms and sectors. General retailers, auto dealers, and hospitali-
ty contacts report increases in business activity, while manufacturing contacts reported little change. Homes sales in-
creased sharply while construction activity was mixed. In comparison with our previous report, the outlook among con-
tacts is slightly more pessimistic while also much more uncertain. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to increase at a robust pace. 
However, the pace of recovery has slowed through the 
reporting period and the level of economic activity re-
mains depressed. Businesses have begun to reopen and 
bring back furloughed workers, but recovery has been 
uneven across firms and sectors. Small businesses have 
been slow to recover; one staffing contact reported small 
firms were “decimated,” estimating that 5% of their small 
clients had filed for bankruptcy and expecting up to 25% 
to do so by the end of the year. Businesses that support 
other businesses, such as wholesalers and intermediate-
goods manufacturers, have also been slow to recall 
workers in the face of weak demand. Some firms report-
ed difficulty hiring back low-wage workers, attributing it to 
continued health concerns and unemployment benefits. 
Other firms, especially larger ones, have increasingly 
laid off workers as they reassessed how long the recov-
ery will take and whether they should downsize perma-
nently. 
Reports on wage growth have been mixed. Some firms 
have increased wages for low-wage workers to entice 
them to return to work and forgo unemployment benefits; 
however, other contacts reported reducing hazard pay. A 
payroll contact reported that half his clients who had 
previously cut wages had returned them to pre-March 
levels. Other firms have reported cutting nonwage bene-
fits, such as matching 401K contributions, to control 
costs. One contact emphasized a systemic lack of 
“normal” raises and bonuses. 
Prices  
Prices have increased slightly since the previous report. 
The majority of contacts reported little to no change in 
input prices. However, many manufacturing and 
healthcare contacts reported somewhat higher input 
prices. Contacts reported robust growth in some com-
modity prices, such as coal, lumber, and shredded 
scrap; however, most prices remain lower than one year 
ago. Prices for crops have decreased moderately since 
the previous report. Some crop prices have risen robust-
ly, but others such as those for wheat have decreased 
significantly. Although the price of corn has increased 
moderately since the previous report, the price has de-
creased significantly year-over-year. This has been 
largely triggered by lower demand for ethanol. The truck-
ing industry has increased prices for services slightly 
since the previous report. 
Consumer Spending  
Consumer spending activity remains far below typical 
levels, though general retailers, auto dealers, and hospi-
tality contacts reported increases in business activity 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
since our previous report. Seasonally adjusted credit and 
debit card spending in most District states increased 
from the end of May to mid-June. Most general retailers 
indicate that activity in May has exceeded low expecta-
tions and they had reported an optimistic outlook prior to 
the recent surge in new coronavirus cases. Many restau-
rants continue to struggle under modified business mod-
els, and some indicate that they may not be able to stay 
open much longer if business conditions do not improve. 
Auto dealers reported strong sales in June, with some 
firms reporting year-over-year increases. St. Louis-area 
hotel contacts reported that occupancy has increased 
since the beginning of May but remains significantly 
depressed. Hospitality contacts do not expect business 
to return to typical levels until 2022. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity is little changed since our previous 
report. Survey-based indices showed slight improvement 
in overall manufacturing activity in Arkansas and Mis-
souri from May to June. New orders and production 
increased modestly in both states, the first signs of 
growth since February. Contacts in steel and printing 
industries reported no change to production because of 
limited demand; both are still producing at about two-
thirds capacity. One contact reported extending planned 
shutdowns past the Fourth of July, resulting in the fur-
loughing of some workers; another contact reported 
having recently laid off a few workers. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the services sector has improved since the 
previous report. Job vacancies decreased uniformly 
across the District in nonfinancial services firms by ap-
proximately 10 percent year-over-year. Staffing contacts 
reported that professional service sector positions have 
increased halfway to pre-pandemic levels and very few 
contractors have been laid-off in recent weeks. A hospi-
tal contact reported volumes for inpatient services has 
increased faster than anticipated. Reports from contacts 
at airports in the District noted steady recoveries. Pas-
senger traffic has more than doubled since our previous 
report. However, levels compared with last year remain 
severely depressed. Contacts reported that cargo traffic 
remains steady and is only down in some airports by 
only 1.5 percent compared with last year. Trucking con-
tacts noted small increases in revenue due to price and 
hauling increases. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has sharply increased 
since the previous report. Pending home sales in early 
June improved from their lows in April, and some con-
tacts reported new sales above levels relative to last 
year. Home showings in early June were up relative to 
one year ago across most states in the District. Inventory 
levels remained very low throughout the District, and 
contacts reported increased competition for available 
listings, with sales exceeding the asking price. A contact 
in St. Louis reported an increase in in-person showings 
and closings. A contact in Memphis noted that some 
businesses were downsizing their office real estate as 
they moved toward permanent remote-work arrange-
ments. Construction activity was mixed in late May and 
early June as businesses reported either no change or a 
decrease in weekly operating revenue in June relative to 
prior weeks. A contact in St. Louis reported a slowdown 
in invoice payments from customers, suspecting that 
customers were looking for ways to conserve cash. 
Banking and Finance 
Reports from District banks indicate a strong increase in 
demand for banking services. Demand for commercial 
and industrial loans has increased sharply, while resi-
dential real estate and consumer loan volumes modestly 
increased. Low interest rates spurred many customers to 
refinance mortgages, providing new fee income to bank-
ers. In addition to mortgage closings, PPP loans and 
other incentives have provided additional liquidity. How-
ever, banking contacts have expressed concerns about 
profitability due to the expectation of a longer-term low-
rate environment and higher delinquency rates. As a 
result, many bankers have reduced deposit rates to 
offset margins. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions remain unchanged relative 
to the previous reporting period. Between the end of May 
and end of June, the percentages of corn and soybeans 
rated fair or better increased modestly, while the per-
centages of cotton and rice decreased modestly. The 
percentages of corn, rice, and soybeans rated fair or 
better are significantly above their values a year ago, 
while the percentage of cotton rated fair or better slightly 
decreased. Agriculture contacts have indicated that, in 
the past month, agribusinesses have not experienced 
significant shortages or slowdowns in demand and have 
remained open due to their essential status. However, 
there is some concern that additional financing may be 
necessary to bridge gaps in cash flows if the overall 
economic slowdown is prolonged. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity was mixed since the previous report, with declines in most sectors, despite some im-
provements due to emergency federal stimulus and gradual reopening of state economies in the District. Employment 
rose from very contracted levels, wage pressures were flat, and price pressures remained minimal. The District econo-
my saw growth in consumer spending and tourism, but decline in services, construction and real estate, manufacturing, 
energy, and mining; agricultural conditions remained poor.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment rose since the last report, but from very 
contracted levels, and labor markets remained volatile. 
Solid employment gains were seen in May, and a variety 
of sources suggested a continuation in June. The lifting 
of pandemic-related restrictions on many businesses 
allowed increased hiring and callbacks of laid-off workers 
in many sectors. Ad hoc polls in June by the Minneapolis 
Fed showed that slightly more firms were hiring than 
those that were cutting staff. A staffing contact in North 
Dakota said job orders have been “much better” since 
hitting lows in April. Volatility remains in the labor market, 
however. Announcements of temporary and permanent 
mass layoffs rose notably in June in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin after slowing significantly in May. Initial 
unemployment claims fell in June across the District 
compared with April and May levels, but remained 
significantly elevated. Monthly job postings plummeted 
across the District in May, but there was some evidence 
of stabilizing in June. Numerous sources noted that 
seasonal hiring over the summer would remain well 
below normal levels. A contact in the Bakken region of 
North Dakota reported that energy-related firms “would 
not try to save their employees” as they had during the 
downturn in oil prices five years ago, and that wide-scale 
layoffs had begun “and will continue at a fairly expedited 
rate.” A workforce contact in northern Minnesota said 
that some businesses expected somewhat higher 
permanent layoffs than they were communicating 
publicly with employees.  
Wage pressures were flat overall since the last report. 
Ad hoc polls by the Minneapolis Fed found that a 
majority of employers have made no changes in wages 
since the onset of the pandemic; slightly more reported 
wage decreases than those reporting increases. Faced 
with budget deficits, some local governments have 
reportedly instituted furloughs or negotiated wage cuts, 
or both. However, some firms that have enjoyed strong 
demand during the pandemic have increased wages. A 
discount retailer raised its starting wage from $13 to $15 
an hour, and a second discount retailer gave its 
Minnesota employees a $5 million bonus for working 
through the pandemic—the third such bonus in as many 
months. A major health care provider in Minnesota also 
ended furloughs and pay cuts to most workers after 
demand rebounded faster than anticipated.     
Prices  
Price pressures remained minimal. The majority of 
respondents to a recent poll of Ninth District firms in a 
diverse mix of sectors reported no change in prices 
charged for their products and services in the second 
quarter of 2020 relative to a year earlier; of the 
remainder, more reported decreases in prices than 
increases. Contacts reported slightly more pressure on 
input prices. Manufacturing contacts generally reported 
flat or decreased input prices, with the significant 
exception of personal protective equipment, which 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
remained in tight supply. Retail fuel prices in District 
states have climbed appreciably since the previous 
report, though they remain below their prepandemic 
levels. Prices received by farmers in May were mixed.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending improved since the last report, 
boosted by recent federal stimulus and the reopening of 
many businesses closed by the pandemic. But overall 
levels remained depressed. Numerous sources reported 
that consumer-facing businesses (e.g., retail, 
restaurants, and bars) were seeing increased traffic 
compared with May. But most were still well below 
normal seasonal activity, and even below restricted 
capacities. A Minnesota mall said it was seeing about 
one-quarter of its normal shopper activity in June. 
Tourism contacts in Minnesota and Montana confirmed 
that the majority of large events booked for the second 
half of the year have been canceled; one contact called it 
a “rolling cascade.” June traffic across the Mackinac 
Bridge into Michigan’s Upper Peninsula was down 18 
percent over a year earlier, an improvement over May 
crossings, which plummeted by 37 percent.  
Motor vehicle sales were strong. A dealership with 
multiple locations in the western part of the District saw 
sales growth of 15 percent or more in May and June. 
Sales of recreational vehicles were also healthy. Data on 
motor vehicle sales taxes and title registrations showed 
similar upticks in Minnesota and Wisconsin. Passenger 
screenings in June at the eight largest District airports 
roughly doubled over the previous month, but remained 
75 percent below last year. Airport contacts said that 
leisure travel was returning faster than business travel.  
Services 
Professional services firms reported decreased activity 
since the last report. Contacts in advertising and 
marketing reported that clients had curtailed spending as 
they sought to hold on to cash. Vendors providing 
displays, food, or logistics services to support 
convention, exhibition, and entertainment events 
continued to report a severe contraction in demand. 
Contacts in trucking and logistics reported steady 
business overall, with variation depending on customer 
base.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was down moderately overall. 
The value of May construction starts across District 
states rose compared with April, but was notably down 
from 2019. The number of active projects was also 
trending modestly lower through the end of June. 
Minnesota construction contacts reported flat or falling 
levels of new projects out for bid. Recent permit activity 
showed signs of slowing, particularly in the city of 
Minneapolis, though not everywhere. Numerous sources 
also said more firms were competing for available work. 
Residential construction fell modestly overall, due mostly 
to a sizable drop in single-family permits in Minneapolis-
St. Paul; increases were seen in St. Cloud, Minn., 
Bismarck, N.D., and Rapid City, S.D.  
Commercial real estate fell moderately since the last 
report. Office space was under pressure given the 
slower economy and delayed return of remote workers to 
central business districts. Traditional retail space 
remained under tremendous strain. A major retailer 
closed six locations across the District. A Minnesota mall 
reported that many tenants were still closed in late June. 
Those that were open “are really struggling, nowhere 
near break-even,” and leases for virtually all tenants had 
been altered or renegotiated. Residential real estate was 
down across the District, according to the most recent 
(May) sales data available at deadline. Most regions saw 
double-digit declines in closed home sales compared 
with last year, with many reaching 20 to 30 percent.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity contracted slightly since the last 
report. An index of manufacturing conditions indicated 
decreased activity in June compared with a month earlier 
in Minnesota; the index for North Dakota and South 
Dakota rebounded to a slightly expansionary level. Some 
contacts reported strong demand in the plastics sector 
and supporting industries due to the need for personal 
protective equipment. However, numerous other 
contacts reported a marked slowdown in new orders as 
customers remained in “wait-and-see” mode. “Our order 
books have never had fewer future demand orders,” 
noted a custom manufacturer, who added that its 
existing demand was “nearly immediate.”   
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained poor. Producers 
reported that disruptions in trade with China were 
creating “headwinds” in grain markets. Recent declines 
in milk prices dealt a blow to already suffering dairy 
producers. In contrast, the majority of the District’s corn 
and soybean crops were in good or excellent condition 
as of late June. Oil and gas activity continued to decline 
even as crude prices rebounded somewhat. The number 
of active drilling rigs in the District as of late June was 
down sharply again from the previous reporting period. 
Multiple District iron ore production facilities remained 
shuttered as demand for steel was low. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
After a sharp contraction in previous months, Tenth District economic activity rebounded slightly in June. Expectations 
also improved, and contacts in most sectors anticipated higher levels of activity in the months ahead. Consumer spending 
increased modestly, with stronger retail, restaurant, auto, and tourism sales. Manufacturing activity expanded slightly, 
driven by gains at non-durable goods plants. Sales also picked up in the transportation and wholesale trade sectors, 
although transportation activity remained well below year-ago levels. Professional and high-tech services contacts contin-
ued to report lower sales, and additional declines were anticipated in the months ahead. Residential real estate activity 
increased moderately as home sales, prices and construction activity rose. However, commercial real estate activity 
dropped further. Energy activity also continued to decline, and contacts expected oil prices to remain below the price 
needed to substantially increase drilling for more than a year. The agriculture sector remained weak, but all meat-packing 
plants were operational by late June. District employment started to recover, with the most significant gains in the retail, 
restaurant and tourism sectors. Despite recent improvement, employment still remained well below year-ago levels in 
several sectors. Wages rose modestly, and prices increased across most District sectors.            
Employment and Wages  
District employment started to recover in June after 
declining in the previous two survey periods. The most 
significant gains occurred in the retail, restaurant, and 
tourism sectors, with retail employment approaching 
year-ago levels. However, several industries reported 
employment levels that were still sharply below a year 
ago including transportation, tourism, restaurants and 
durable-goods manufacturing. Overall, employment was 
anticipated to increase slightly in the months ahead, but 
expectations were varied across industries.  
Labor shortages were not an issue for the majority of 
respondents, but some contacts reported shortages for 
truck drivers, skilled technicians, and restaurant workers. 
Wages rose slightly, and modest gains were expected in 
the coming months.                 
Prices  
Input and selling prices rose in June, and modest price 
increases were expected in both the services and manu-
facturing sectors in the months ahead. Retail contacts 
noted moderate growth in both input and selling prices 
and expected additional increases going forward. Both 
input and selling prices rose sharply in the restaurant 
sector and similar price growth was anticipated in the 
next few months. Construction supply respondents noted 
a modest rise in selling prices. Selling prices continued 
to decline in the transportation industry, but input prices 
rose moderately. Raw materials prices edged up in the 
manufacturing sector, while the prices of finished prod-
ucts rose slightly.                
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending picked up modestly since the last 
survey period after plummeting in previous months. 
Sales increased for auto, restaurants, tourism, and retail-
ers as many businesses reopened to consumers. De-
spite improved auto, restaurant and tourism sales, activi-
ty remained well below year-ago levels. However, retail 
activity was up from a year ago, driven by higher sales at 
grocery stores and building and garden supplies retail-
ers. Health services sales continued to contract, but at a 
slower rate compared with previous months. A majority 
of firms reported receiving loans from the SBA PPP 
program, and most contacts indicated that these loans 
helped prevent layoffs and cover costs related to the 
pandemic. Expectations for all consumer spending sec-
tors rose considerably after historically low expectations 
a few months ago.           
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded slightly in June after 
steep decreases for three straight months. The increase 
in activity was driven by an uptick at non-durable goods 
factories, including sharply higher production at food and 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
beverage manufacturing plants. Activity at durable goods 
factories, especially for primary and fabricated metals, 
continued to decline, but at a slower pace than in previ-
ous months. Production and new orders increased slight-
ly but remained well below year-ago levels. Over 75 
percent of factory contacts reported applying for the SBA 
PPP program, and most indicated that those loans pre-
vented some layoffs and furloughs. Expectations for 
future activity increased, though capital expenditures 
plans and expectations for new orders for export re-
mained subdued. 
Outside of manufacturing, sales increased in the trans-
portation and wholesale trade sectors. Wholesale trade 
sales were near year-ago levels, but transportation sales 
remained significantly below year-ago levels. Sales 
dipped further at professional and high-tech services 
firms, and were below levels a year ago. Contacts in the 
transportation and professional and high-tech services 
sectors anticipated fewer sales and capital expenditures 
in the months ahead. By contrast, expectations among 
wholesale trade contracts rebounded, with contacts 
expecting significantly higher sales moving forward.  
Real Estate and Construction  
Residential real estate activity expanded moderately in 
June, while commercial real estate activity declined 
modestly. Residential sales increased moderately as 
stay-at-home orders were lifted, and contacts were opti-
mistic about strong sales in the months to come. Inven-
tories fell further, and were sharply below year-ago lev-
els. Home prices increased moderately and were ex-
pected to increase further as sales strengthen and inven-
tories remain low. Residential construction activity rose 
modestly and construction supply firms noted a slight 
increase in sales, with one contact noting a surge in 
sales for deck supplies. Commercial real estate condi-
tions deteriorated further as vacancy rates increased 
significantly, while absorption, sales, and prices de-
clined. Many contacts noted that access to credit had 
become more difficult in recent months, and one re-
spondent reported that retail leasing was particularly 
challenging.    
Banking 
Banking contacts reported a slight decrease in overall 
loan demand in recent weeks including a slight decrease 
in consumer loan demand, a modest decrease in com-
mercial real estate loan demand, and a moderate de-
crease in commercial and industrial loan demand. How-
ever, the demand for residential real estate loans in-
creased sharply since the last survey. Bankers reported 
that credit standards tightened across all loan catego-
ries. Loan quality decreased slightly compared to a year 
ago, but a sharp deterioration was expected over the 
next six months. Deposit levels rose at a strong pace, 
with deposits from stimulus checks and the SBA PPP 
program playing a large role.                
Energy 
District energy activity collapsed further in June, with 
sharp drops in revenues, profits and employment. The 
number of active oil and gas rigs in the District also 
continued to decline as firms shut-in additional wells to 
ease production levels. The oversupply of oil combined 
with weaker demand due to the global pandemic contin-
ued to curb regional oil production and well-head prices. 
Contacts expected oil and gas prices to rise modestly in 
the months ahead, but prices were expected to remain 
below the level needed for a substantial increase in 
drilling for more than a year. Additional deterioration was 
anticipated in the energy sector, although the pace of 
declines was expected to moderate. Despite weak condi-
tions, over two-thirds of energy contacts reported that 
they could survive for more than a year if current reve-
nue levels persisted.                 
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy remained weak despite 
some signs of stabilization in markets for key agricultural 
commodities. By late June, all U.S. meat packing plants 
were operational, but COVID-19 continued to impede 
supply chain functions. Capacity utilization and meat 
production at packing plants increased slightly since 
May, but appeared to remain limited somewhat by modi-
fied operations. Alongside production constraints, de-
mand for meat was expected to decrease in 2020 as a 
result of broader economic weaknesses, putting addi-
tional downward pressure on cattle and hog prices. 
Ethanol production rebounded slightly in June, but re-
mained about 20 percent lower than a year ago and 
continued to weigh on corn prices. District contacts 
reported that farm borrower liquidity weakened consider-
ably alongside lower commodity prices, but government 
aid programs could provide a moderate degree of sup-
port to agricultural credit conditions.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy regained its footing following unprecedented declines in the previous two reporting peri-
ods. Activity in the manufacturing and service sectors began rebounding, as did retail spending. However, the level of 
output and demand remained below pre-COVID levels. Loan volumes contracted at a modest pace, and drilling activity 
fell to new lows. Activity in the housing market expanded, with new home sales outperforming activity in the existing-
home market. Employment stabilized, according to contacts, but overall labor market conditions remained weak. Wages 
were flat to slightly up. While input costs rose modestly, selling prices generally dipped further. Outlooks improved, but a 
weak economy, depressed activity in the energy sector, the resurgence of COVID-19 infections, and a pause in the 
reopening of the district economy were causing concern among contacts. 
Employment and Wages  
Most contacts reported holding employment steady. 
Manufacturing and service sector employment was flat, 
with scattered reports of hiring, while energy contracted. 
Forty-three percent of respondents to a June Dallas Fed 
survey of 400 Texas manufacturing and services firms 
indicated reduced employment levels due to COVID-19 
and, among this group, 26 percent said it would take 
more than a year to get back to pre-COVID headcounts 
and 19 percent said they do not ever expect employment 
to get back to pre-COVID levels. Also, many contacts 
cited challenges in bringing workers back given rising 
infection rates, quarantined employees, and confirmed 
positive COVID-19 cases among staff.  
Wages were flat to slightly up; however, airlines and 
energy firms among others noted pay cuts and/or freez-
es. Companies looking to hire along with staffing firms 
noted difficulty recruiting due to lack of applicants and/or 
high unemployment insurance benefits. 
Prices 
Input costs rose at a modest pace, in part due to supply-
chain issues, rising freight costs, and precautions being 
taken by firms to protect staff and customers from expo-
sure to COVID-19. Selling prices were flat to down due 
to weak demand, though there were reports of increased 
prices for new and used vehicles arising from inventory 
shortages. New home prices rose slightly, and home-
builders noted getting only modest relief from contractors 
and suppliers on pricing. Airline ticket prices held steady 
or dipped. Staffing firms reported no change in bill rates, 
while some oilfield services firms said prices were down 
10-15 percent vs. earlier in the year.  
Manufacturing  
Output growth rebounded in June following steep de-
clines in the previous three months. Durables and non-
durables increased, led by strength in transportation 
equipment, food, printing, and construction-related man-
ufacturing. Declines in the oil and gas industry remained 
a significant headwind among those experiencing sus-
tained weakness. Refiners and chemical manufacturers 
noted modest improvements in utilization rates, though 
margins were still depressed. Chemical firms said de-
mand for PPE and disinfectant products remained ro-
bust, but resin and basic chemical demand was soft. 
Manufacturing outlooks improved, though the recent 
spike in COVID-19 cases and a weak economy weighed 
on business sentiment.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales rebounded sharply in June, albeit from de-
pressed levels. A majority of respondents noted an in-
The Beige Book Ŷ July 2020 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
crease in sales activity, though reports regarding the 
pace of growth were mixed. Auto dealers cited a pickup 
in demand, with reports of strength in all-terrain vehicle 
(ATV) sales. Inventories dropped further, particularly for 
auto dealers, which some contacts attributed to supply-
chain issues. Outlooks were optimistic but contingent 
upon a stabilization of COVID-19 cases.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Service sector activity rose modestly in June, following a 
period of declining demand from March through May. 
Performance was mixed across industries, with those 
experiencing sluggish activity citing weakness in the oil 
and gas sector, continued operational restrictions, and 
weak demand. Health care firms saw a strong pickup in 
demand. Some professional and technical services firms 
said they were benefitting from strength in the residential 
real estate market. Activity in the leisure and hospitality 
sector rebounded but remained well below last year’s 
levels. Airline passenger demand grew modestly during 
the reporting period; however, it remained markedly 
lower compared to year-ago levels. Domestic demand 
was driven by leisure travel, and overseas travel re-
mained limited. Demand for staffing services was flat to 
down during the reporting period. Outlooks were mixed 
and generally uncertain due to the resurgence of COVID
-19, and concern about future consumer demand trends. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market improved markedly. Exist-
ing-home sales fell in May partly due to a lack of invento-
ry, but picked up in June. Showings were up as well, 
indicating increased buyer interest. New-home sales 
strengthened, with several contacts noting a record 
month in May and continued solid activity in June. Con-
tacts said record-low mortgage rates were driving sales, 
with the pace of sales higher in the low- to mid-price 
range. After a temporary pause, new development activi-
ty was picking back up, and contacts noted evaluating 
new lot/land deals and/or moving forward with planned 
acquisitions. Outlooks have improved significantly, but 
there was lingering concern about the demand impact in 
the fall of a weak labor market, the upcoming election, 
and virus flare ups.  
Multifamily contacts said leasing activity weakened in 
early to mid-spring due to COVID-19, but has improved 
since then. Rents were flat to down, and concessions 
have increased. Apartment rent collections continued to 
outperform expectations, but the upcoming expiration of 
federal unemployment benefits was a downside risk to 
the outlook. Office leasing remained sluggish, though it 
did improve slightly compared to the previous reporting 
period. Activity was concentrated in short-term renewals 
and/or smaller-sized deals. Industrial demand remained 
solid.  
Financial Services 
Loan demand fell, though at a more moderate pace than 
in the previous reporting period. Volumes weakened 
further for all loan types except for residential real estate, 
which rose sharply. Loan pricing continued its marked 
decline, and credit standards tightened further. Loan 
performance eroded noticeably, and majority of respond-
ents expected further deterioration. Nearly 19 percent of 
banks observed an increase in draws on existing com-
mercial credit lines due to COVID-19, down from 37 
percent from six weeks ago. On average, bankers said 
roughly 15 percent of their total loans were currently in 
deferral. Expectations regarding general business condi-
tions improved, and the outlook for future loan demand 
turned positive for the first time since March. 
Energy 
Eleventh District drilling activity eroded further but 
showed signs of stabilizing by the end of the reporting 
period. Meanwhile, well completion activity stabilized and 
logged modest weekly gains. Though overall oilfield 
activity remained depressed, sentiment has improved 
due to a pickup in oil prices, and a majority of firms ex-
pect to restart shut-in wells by September. The recent 
increase in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations was 
causing some concern among contacts. Most contacts 
don’t expect U.S. crude oil production to return to pre-
COVID levels until at least mid-2021. 
Agriculture 
Soil moisture conditions remained favorable across most 
of the district, except for the Texas Panhandle area 
where there was drought. Wheat remained a bright spot 
with production up from last year, though prices were 
lower. While overall crop conditions were favorable, 
lower-than-profitable prices were leading agricultural 
producers to rely on government support payments to 
supplement farm income. On the livestock side, meat 
packers were adjusting to the new operating environ-
ment and have ramped production back up. Dairy prices 
rose as the industry made a concerted effort to curb 
production in response to lower restaurant demand. Ŷ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District contracted modestly on balance during the reporting period of mid-May through 
June. Employment levels increased slightly, as rehiring activity proceeded cautiously. Wages were generally stable, as 
were prices. Sales of retail goods rose moderately, while activity for providers of consumer and business services con-
tinued to contract sharply. Manufacturing activity was mixed, and conditions in the agriculture sector remained weak. 
Conditions in residential real estate improved moderately, while the commercial market was mixed. Lending activity 
ticked up. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment levels increased slightly, as reopening and 
rehiring activity proceeded cautiously after the prior 
months’ surge in layoffs and furloughs. Most companies 
that reduced employment in the wake of the COVID-19 
outbreak added only a fraction of previously separated 
workers to their payrolls, while others that did not lay off 
or furlough workers scaled back hiring plans going for-
ward. IT and business services companies noted contin-
ued hiring, albeit at a slightly slower pace. Building mate-
rial producers reported a tick up in payrolls in response 
to growing demand from the construction sector. In Los 
Angeles, restaurants increased employment modestly, 
but anticipated having to reinstate furloughs due to a 
reversal in the reopening process. Entertainment stream-
ing services increased employment slightly, while unem-
ployment in film and television production in Southern 
California remained historically elevated. Over the next 
several months, tourism industry employers in Hawaii 
expect to recall only about 10 to 15 percent of the work-
ers who were laid off or furloughed in March and April. 
Some contacts reported generous unemployment com-
pensation limited the pace of hiring.    
Wages were broadly stable. While contacts noted mod-
estly to moderately falling wages for some lower-skilled 
jobs and rising salaries for in-demand jobs in IT and 
finance, most reported stable compensation. A few 
contacts cited firms’ tendency to try to ride out the initial 
shock of a downturn before adjusting wages and other 
business costs. However, some firms have suspended 
or postponed bonuses and merit increases in response 
to deteriorating business conditions.  
Prices  
Most contacts reported stable prices over the reporting 
period as businesses generally took a cautious approach 
to potential price changes. A few observed slightly higher 
prices at restaurants, perhaps to account for the cost of 
new cleaning and safety supplies and supply constraints 
for certain foods. Some restaurants limited price chang-
es in an attempt to retain customers. Building materials’ 
prices ticked up with construction projects restarting or 
continuing in several regions and residential permitting 
rising in some areas. Electricity and fuel prices were 
unchanged on balance. Selling prices for most crops fell, 
as supply outstripped demand, especially from foreign 
markets. A credit union in California suspended most 
fees on consumer accounts. Hoteliers and airline opera-
tors decreased some prices for tourist destinations.    
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales rose moderately, as restrictions on nones-
sential businesses eased in the early part of the report-
ing period. Contacts observed a broad reversal in the 
negative growth trajectory of retail activity, with foot 
traffic to brick-and-mortar establishments picking up. 
However, in several areas, a late June resurgence in 
COVID-19 cases slowed or reversed the reopening 
process, jeopardizing further recovery in consumer 
spending. In the Mountain West, retail sales beat expec-
tations in June and auto dealers saw strong demand 
over the past two months. However, auto dealers antici-
pated a falloff in sales over the next several months as 
vehicle inventories reached rock-bottom levels and were 
not expected to recover until the fourth quarter. Sales of 
wood products at home improvement stores in the Pacif-
ic Northwest increased solidly. An Arizona big box retail-
er reported lower in-store sales and ample inventory. 
Steep declines in tourist arrivals in Hawaii and Southern 
California have severely limited foot traffic to stores 
The Beige Book ■ July 2020 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
dependent on visitors’ spending during summer months.  
Activity in consumer and business services contracted 
sharply. In the Los Angeles area, most restaurants oper-
ated at a loss or remained closed entirely. Moreover, 
restaurants that were operating maintained narrow in-
ventories in case shelter-in-place restrictions were reim-
posed, a decision that weakened sales at restaurant 
suppliers. Hawaii hotel occupancy rates continued to run 
at a tiny fraction of normal levels, while a Southern Cali-
fornia hotel owner reported a moderate improvement in 
room bookings to a level still significantly below prior 
years. A provider of business advisory services in Cali-
fornia reported that many client firms curtailed spending 
on nonessential business services and declined to ex-
tend some contracts, suggesting a weak consensus 
business outlook. Domestic visitor levels ticked up in 
some Mountain West national parks, yet the absence of 
international travelers more than offset this positive 
development, leaving revenues depressed on a year-
over-year basis. Electricity usage fell slightly on balance, 
as higher residential demand only partially offset lower 
industrial demand. In the entertainment sector, film and 
television production was still frozen while media sub-
scription services saw a further tick-up in sales.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity was mixed but remained tepid in 
general. Where demand warranted firms’ returning to full 
capacity, their ability to do so depended largely on how 
readily they could adapt to social-distancing regulations, 
a factor that varied significantly from business to busi-
ness. A steel producer in Oregon reported that funds 
from the Paycheck Protection Program helped them stay 
afloat over the reporting period but that work orders were 
still a fraction of their pre-COVID-19 level. On the other 
hand, a building product manufacturer saw an encourag-
ing increase in production and sales but attributed some 
of the jump to making up for April’s very weak activity 
rather than improved market conditions. Elsewhere, a 
renewable energy equipment manufacturer noted a 
modest rebound in capacity utilization as supply chains 
passing through China and Mexico reopened. Spotty 
availability of input materials generally posed an addi-
tional challenge for some manufacturers attempting to 
move toward more normal operations.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Agriculture sector activity remained weak on balance 
over the reporting period. While yields were generally 
solid for most crops, including wheat, potatoes, and fruit, 
domestic sales were mixed and foreign sales poor. This 
combination of strong crop yields and subdued demand 
further deteriorated profit margins for many growers. 
Contacts in the Pacific Northwest and Mountain West 
reported continued weakness in domestic wholesale 
distributors’ and restaurants’ demand for grains and 
potatoes. On the other hand, fruit and vegetable growers 
in California noted moderately higher demand from 
domestic grocery stores. On the export side, the strong 
dollar and continued tepid foreign demand due to the 
COVID-19 outbreak limited export sales for growers 
across the District. For example, California nut exports 
fell further after planned holiday celebrations around the 
summer solstice in China were cancelled.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential construction activity increased moderately. In 
most areas, contacts reported solid permitting and build-
ing activity. In Seattle, residential permits were slightly 
higher than in the same period last year, and a Northern 
California contact noted that permitting activity was 
picking up, reflecting a return to construction after some 
stoppages in March and April. Overall, home sales 
picked up noticeably while inventories declined, putting 
some upward pressure on home prices. In Oregon, a 
large backlog of homeowners wanting to list their home 
for sale indicated that inventory in some areas may rise 
in coming months. In Idaho and Eastern Washington, 
observers saw early evidence of buyers moving from 
higher-cost coastal markets after starting permanent 
teleworking. A Northern California contact reported that a 
number of renters were unable to pay rent, while some 
homeowners were delinquent on mortgage payments.  
Activity in the commercial real estate market was mixed. 
Contacts in the Mountain West and California noted that 
some commercial projects that paused due to virus 
concerns have restarted. Office occupancy was general-
ly stable in this region. However, the outlook for office 
occupancy and new office construction in District cities is 
highly uncertain, with some predicting a steep decline in 
occupancy and a freeze in new construction. Demand for 
warehouse space picked up in Northern California.     
Financial Institutions  
Overall lending activity ticked up, with contacts noting 
home mortgage refinancing and PPP loans as key driv-
ers. Bankers reported that households capitalized on 
lower interest rates and PPP loans helped businesses 
maintain solvency and solid credit standing. Fiscal sup-
port to households supported their credit standing too. 
However, a fin-tech firm in San Francisco saw a marked 
decline in the overall credit quality of its small business 
customers. A few contacts continued to express concern 
about the ambiguity of certain PPP forgiveness terms. 
Liquidity conditions were solid across the District, and 
the supply of deposits increased modestly. ■ 


