The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
January 15, 2020 
January 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

National Summary 
    1 
Boston 
A-1
First District 
New York 
B-1
Second District  
Philadelphia 
C-1
Third District  
Cleveland 
D-1
Fourth District 
Richmond 
E-1
Fifth District  
Atlanta 
F-1
Sixth District 
Chicago 
G-1
Seventh District  
St. Louis 
H-1
Eighth District 
Minneapolis 
I-1
Ninth District  
Kansas City 
J-1
Tenth District 
Dallas 
K-1
Eleventh District 
San Francisco 
L-1
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
based on information collected on or before January 6, 2020. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity generally continued to expand modestly in the final six weeks of 2019. The Dallas and Richmond 
Districts noted above-average growth, while Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Kansas City reported sub-par growth. Con-
sumer spending grew at a modest to moderate pace, with a number of Districts noting some pickup from the prior 
reporting period. On balance, holiday sales were said to be solid, with several Districts noting the growing importance 
of online shopping. Vehicle sales generally expanded moderately, though a handful of Districts reported flat sales. 
Tourism was mixed, with growth reported in the eastern seaboard Districts but activity little changed in the Midwest and 
West. Manufacturing activity was essentially flat in most Districts, as in the previous report. Business in nonfinancial 
services was mixed but, on balance, growing modestly. Transportation activity was also mixed across Districts, with a 
majority reporting flat to weaker activity. Banks mostly characterized loan volume as steady to expanding moderately. 
Home sales trends varied widely across Districts but were flat overall, while residential rental markets strengthened. 
Some Districts pointed to low inventories as restraining home sales. New residential construction expanded modestly. 
Commercial real estate activity varied substantially across Districts. Agricultural conditions were little changed, as was 
activity in the energy sector. In many Districts, tariffs and trade uncertainty continued to weigh on some businesses. 
Expectations for the near-term outlook remained modestly favorable across the nation. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment was steady to rising modestly in most Districts, while labor markets remained tight throughout the nation. 
Most Districts cited widespread labor shortages as a factor constraining job growth, and, in a few cases, business 
expansion. A few Districts noted brisk demand for professional, technical, and managerial workers. A number of Dis-
tricts reported job cuts or reduced hiring among manufacturers, and there were scattered reports of job cuts in the 
transportation and energy sectors. Wage growth was characterized as modest or moderate in most Districts—similar to 
the prior reporting period—and there were scattered reports of wage increases from year-end hikes in minimum wages. 
A few Districts also noted the use of benefits, incentives, training programs, and automation to reduce vacancies.  
Prices 
Prices continued to rise at a modest pace during the reporting period, as did input costs. A number of Districts reported 
that retail selling prices rose at a slightly faster, but still subdued, pace. A few Districts indicated that some businesses 
were passing along tariff costs to consumers—mostly in retail but also in construction. Some Districts noted that restau-
rants were being pressured by rising food prices. There were scattered reports of declining prices in some manufactur-
ing industries, as well as in the energy sector. Those Districts reporting on price expectations indicated that prices were 
expected to continue to rise in the months ahead.  
Boston 
Economic activity expanded at a modest to moderate 
pace in the closing weeks of 2019. Software and IT 
services firms cited relatively strong growth; manufactur-
ers and retailers also reported revenue increases from a 
year earlier. Residential real estate markets saw contin-
ued inventory shortages. Labor market tightness persist-
ed. Outlooks were positive. 
New York 
The regional economy expanded at a modest pace. The 
labor market remained tight, though hiring activity was 
subdued and wages grew modestly. Manufacturing 
activity picked up. Loan demand grew, though financial 
sector contacts more broadly reported weakening activi-
ty. Both input prices and selling prices continued to rise 
modestly. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
On balance, business activity slowed to a slight pace of 
growth during the current Beige Book period. Labor 
markets remained tight throughout the District—slowing 
employment growth and raising wage pressure. Still, 
price increases remained modest. Most firms expressed 
cautious optimism. 
Cleveland 
The Fourth District economy continued to expand at a 
modest pace as a result of continuing strength in some 
key sectors and waning headwinds from manufacturing 
and freight. Retailers reported better-than-expected 
holiday sales amid tight labor markets, modest wage 
gains, and improved consumer confidence. Meanwhile, 
selling prices advanced at a steady, modest rate. 
Richmond 
On balance, the Fifth District economy grew moderately. 
Retail, travel, and tourism picked up. Home sales and 
commercial real estate leasing and construction re-
mained strong. However, manufacturing slowed slightly 
as tariff and other trade policy uncertainties continued. 
Labor markets were strong and wages rose moderately. 
Price growth remained moderate, overall. 
Atlanta 
Economic conditions improved modestly. Labor market 
tightness continued, and wage pressures increased for 
some positions. Non-labor input costs rose, in line with 
expectations. Retail sales and tourism activity were 
strong. Residential real estate conditions improved, and 
commercial real estate activity remained positive. Manu-
facturing activity slowed during the reporting period. 
Chicago 
Economic activity increased modestly. Consumer spend-
ing increased modestly, while business spending and 
construction and real estate activity increased slightly. 
Manufacturing and employment were little changed. 
Wages and prices rose slightly and financial conditions 
improved modestly. The prospects of a trade deal with 
China boosted farmers’ outlooks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Reports from contacts indicate that economic conditions 
have slightly improved since our previous report. St. 
Louis region general retailers had mixed accounts of 
holiday sales. Area tourism and hospitality contacts 
generally cited that business activity met expectations 
over the holiday season. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew at a modest pace. 
Employment was mixed across states in the region. 
Consumer spending rose, with initial reports on holiday 
sales coming in positive. Manufacturing activity was flat 
overall, as slower recent activity contrasted with optimis-
tic expectations for 2020. Commercial and residential 
construction grew modestly. Oil and gas drilling activity 
held steady. 
Kansas City 
District economic activity edged up in late November and 
December, driven by robust retail spending during the 
holiday season and stronger sales in the professional 
and high-tech services and wholesale trade sectors. In 
contrast, manufacturing activity and sales in the trans-
portation sector continued to decline. Economic activity 
in the energy and agriculture sectors also remained 
weak. 
Dallas 
Economic activity expanded solidly, with growth increas-
ing in most sectors. Home sales continued to rise while 
energy activity remained weak. Hiring continued at a 
steady pace. Selling prices were largely flat, even as 
input prices rose. Outlooks generally improved, with 
reduced trade uncertainty boosting optimism. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded at a 
modest pace. The labor market remained tight, and 
wages increased further. Price inflation was up slightly. 
Sales of retail goods increased moderately, and consum-
er and business services activity was up modestly. Com-
merce in the manufacturing sector was stable, and activi-
ty in the agriculture sector was mixed. The residential 
real estate market expanded strongly, while commercial 
real estate activity softened a bit. Lending grew steadily. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to expand in the First District at the close of 2019. Retailers and manufacturers cited mod-
est to moderate revenue increases from a year earlier, while results for software and information technology services 
firms were stronger. Respondents in these three sectors also reported continued tight labor markets, but none men-
tioned increasing wages (other than scheduled minimum wage rises in some states). Price increases continued to be 
modest according to contacts. Inventory shortages persisted in New England residential real estate markets, and medi-
an sales prices for single-family homes and condos rose across the region in November. Greater Boston’s commercial 
real estate market continued to be robust, while commercial activity in the Providence area was moderate. Business 
outlooks ranged from very positive to cautiously optimistic, mostly reflecting expectations that recent trends will continue 
into 2020. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts in all sectors reported that labor markets re-
mained tight in many areas. Retailers noted that mini-
mum wage increases in effect January 1 in some states 
further raise labor costs. While two contacts in the soft-
ware and IT services industry noted that acquisitions 
made in the past year led to increased headcounts, only 
one mentioned that this could lead to future restructur-
ing. Most of the software and IT services hiring is for 
replacement only; while many contacts cited tight labor 
markets as hurdles for filling vacancies, one noted that 
there appeared to be no shortage of entry-level labor. 
One manufacturer, a biotech firm, reported significant 
hiring plans; they plan to roll out a new drug and need 
additional staff. Other manufacturing contacts continued 
to report difficulties hiring new workers. 
Prices  
Business contacts reported that prices had risen modest-
ly or not at all. Retailers indicated that their price increas-
es were very minimal in recent months. For most soft-
ware and IT services firms, pricing was unchanged over 
the past year, but two contacts reported price increases 
of 3 percent to 5 percent year-over-year on contract 
renewals for their larger enterprise customers. Manufac-
turers cited muted pricing pressure. A fish producer said 
that tariffs had stabilized but the resulting costs were 
difficult to pass on to supermarkets.  
Retail and Tourism 
Retailers consulted for this round reported that year-over
-year comparable-store sales results ranged from flat to 
up a few percentage points. Black Friday and Cyber 
Monday results were very strong, while Green Monday 
(December 9) was a bit softer, in what was a very short 
holiday sales season. Contacts expressed some concern 
that higher costs, whether related to labor markets or 
tariffs, in combination with a very competitive retail envi-
ronment, will put a damper on revenue growth. However, 
capital spending plans for 2020 are on pace with or 
exceeding investment expenditures in 2019. An auto 
industry contact reported that November vehicle sales 
were 2 percent higher than a year earlier, continuing at a 
fairly slow but steady pace.  
Travel industry contacts reported that in November, 
occupancy rates were down very slightly compared to 
2018; for 2019 as a whole, occupancy rates were also 
expected to post a slight decrease. However, lodging 
revenues were up year-over-year. In one tourist market, 
this reflected an increase in the average nightly room 
rate. In the Boston area hotel market through November, 
room rates were virtually unchanged from 2018 but new 
hotel rooms increased the supply, with more new hotels 
planned. The travel industry expects 2020 to be a good 
year; large conventions booked in Boston will help, as 
will the greater number of H2B visas issued to fill staffing 
requirements.   
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Reports from manufacturing contacts were generally 
positive. The number of responding firms was small in 
this round. All four contacts reported higher sales versus 
the year-earlier period and two said sales growth ex-
ceeded their expectations. A packaging manufacturer 
attributed the strong growth to retail sales and a defense 
contractor said that orders were high. A frozen fish pro-
ducer said strong revenue growth largely resulted from a 
change in the mix of sales to higher priced goods. 
Three contacts reported lower capital investment but in 
two of those cases the reduction was expected after 
unusually high investment in recent years.   
All manufacturing respondents had a positive outlook.  
Only one, the packaging firm, said it had revised its 
outlook up in recent months, citing a soft period last year 
that appears to have ended. 
Software and Information Technology Services 
The New England software and IT services industry 
ended 2019 on a strong note according to contacts. 
Across the board, demand growth was positive, both 
year-over-year and quarter-over-quarter, with most con-
tacts seeing year-over-year demand growth in the dou-
ble digits. Cloud and subscription-based offerings contin-
ued to perform well, but growth was attributed to an 
overall strong industry rather than specific product lines. 
Overall, contacts were mostly optimistic. While political 
and macroeconomic uncertainty remained a factor, many 
respondents were confident about their ability to execute 
their business plans in the coming quarters and ex-
pected that the strong demand seen at the end of 2019 
would carry through to 2020.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District has 
continued to strengthen despite some variation across 
areas. The leasing market in Boston was robust in the 
last quarter of 2019. Most contacts reported that they 
experienced higher activity than at the end of 2018. 
Activity levels picked up from November to December, 
and rents continued to rise. Vacancies were low and 
construction was robust. Life sciences were strong con-
tributors to growth in 2019. The investment sales market 
in Boston was strong and liquid. Contacts said the com-
mercial real estate market in Boston was a yield genera-
tor and the outlook was very positive.  
In the Providence area, by contrast, the leasing market 
was moderate. Existing construction projects continued 
as scheduled, but few new projects have been undertak-
en. Rents rose in both the office and industrial leasing  
markets. The investment sales market was also moder-
ate, and capitalization rates remained stable. The out-
look for Providence was cautious; one contact men-
tioned that uncertainties associated with the 2020 elec-
tion may cause businesses to be more reserved in mak-
ing long-term decisions. 
Residential Real Estate 
Most residential real estate markets in the First District 
experienced declines in closed sales in November. For 
single-family homes, closed sales decreased in Rhode 
Island, Massachusetts, Boston, and Maine while increas-
ing slightly in New Hampshire. Median sales prices 
increased moderately in all areas. For condominiums, 
closed sales were down in all areas except Maine. Con-
do prices dropped in New Hampshire while increasing or 
staying flat elsewhere in the region. Based on combined 
statistics for single-family homes and condominiums, 
Vermont experienced a moderate decrease in closed 
sales and an increase in prices. 
Inventory shortages prevailed. In particular, Rhode Is-
land, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Maine expe-
rienced double-digit drops in inventory for both single-
family homes and condos. According to the Massachu-
setts respondent, many potential sellers are concerned 
about having nothing to buy after a sale because inven-
tories are so low. Contacts expressed cautious optimism 
for the coming months.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Second District economy grew at a modest pace in the latest reporting period. The labor market remained tight, 
though hiring activity was subdued and wages grew modestly. Businesses reported that both input prices and selling 
prices have continued to rise modestly. Manufacturing activity picked up slightly, while most service industries reported 
little change in business activity. Business contacts in most sectors were cautiously optimistic about the near-term out-
look. Consumer spending was mixed, with retailers giving mixed reports on holiday-season sales, but auto dealers 
noting a fairly vibrant end to the year. Housing markets have been mixed but, on balance, steady, while the residential 
rental market has remained on a positive trend. Commercial real estate markets have weakened further. New commer-
cial construction has remained sluggish, while multi-family residential construction has picked up. Finally, banks report-
ed some pickup in loan demand and little change in delinquency rates, while financial sector contacts more generally 
reported weakening activity.      
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight across the District, 
while hiring has been restrained. Employment agencies 
have noted ongoing trouble finding workers in a wide 
variety of occupations, such as creative IT workers, 
financial controllers, project managers, paralegals, and 
delivery truck drivers.  
Businesses in most sectors continued to report flat em-
ployment. Contacts in manufacturing, education & 
health, and leisure & hospitality reported modest net 
hiring; in contrast, contacts in the transportation and 
finance sectors noted some declines in staffing levels. 
Retailers noted that seasonal hiring was about the same 
as a year earlier, though some contacts said they had 
trouble finding enough seasonal help. Businesses in 
most sectors reported that wage growth has been mod-
est and little changed, though contacts in finance report-
ed flat wages overall. 
Looking ahead, businesses in manufacturing and most 
service sectors still planned on adding to staff; however, 
businesses in the finance and transportation sectors 
projected flat employment, and retailers reported plans 
to reduce staff, on net.   
               
Prices  
Businesses in most sectors reported that both input 
costs and selling prices have continued to rise at a mod-
est pace. However, contacts in education & health and 
wholesale & retail trade have noted fairly widespread 
escalation in the prices they pay. In terms of selling 
prices, the largest price hikes were reported by retailers, 
wholesalers, and transportation firms. Education & 
health providers also noted a leveling off in the prices 
they charge. Broadway theater ticket prices moved up 
during the busy holiday season and were up slightly from 
a year ago.  
Looking ahead, businesses in all sectors plan to raise 
their selling prices in 2020. The most widespread hikes 
were anticipated in transportation, retail trade, profes-
sional & business services, and real estate, while the 
least widespread were in finance, education & health, 
and leisure & hospitality.    
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported mixed results for the holiday season, 
with overall sales mostly flat and on plan, while contacts 
were mildly pessimistic, on balance, about the outlook 
for 2020. A major retail chain reported that same-store 
sales were down slightly from last year but roughly on 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
plan. Upstate New York retailers were somewhat more 
upbeat, noting fairly solid shopper traffic and satisfactory 
sales volume, amidst heavy discounting. A growing 
proportion of holiday shopping was done online, as in-
store sales lagged. Most retailers indicated that invento-
ries were in fairly good shape. 
Sales of both new and used vehicles have strengthened 
further, helped by manufacturer incentives, heavy pro-
motion, and solid credit conditions, according to dealers 
in upstate New York. Consumer confidence in the Middle 
Atlantic States (NY, NJ, PA) fell to a nearly two-year low 
in December, though it remained fairly elevated.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has picked 
up modestly. On the distribution side, reports were more 
mixed: wholesalers reported continuing moderate growth 
in activity, while transportation contacts noted a modest 
downturn in business.  
Looking ahead, manufacturers and wholesalers indicat-
ed that they project modest growth in the months ahead, 
on balance, whereas transportation businesses antici-
pate flat activity. Some contacts in these sectors have 
continued to express concern about tariffs and trade 
uncertainty, as well as minimum wage hikes.    
Services 
Businesses in most service industries indicated that 
activity was essentially flat, on balance, since the last 
report. As in the prior report, one notable exception was 
the leisure & hospitality sector, where contacts continued 
to note moderate growth in activity. Broadway theaters 
reported a typical seasonal pickup in business in Decem-
ber, though both attendance and revenues were down 
modestly from comparable year-ago levels.  
Looking ahead to the first half of 2020, however, con-
tacts in all the major service industries expressed opti-
mism—particularly in the information and professional & 
business service sectors.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, steady since the last report. Prices of 
New York City condos and co-ops continued to weaken 
and were down modestly from a year earlier. The steep-
est declines have continued to be at the high end of the 
market. The inventory of existing homes has risen fur-
ther, reaching a fairly high level in Manhattan and mod-
erate levels in Brooklyn and Queens. In contrast, hous-
ing markets in the suburban areas around New York 
have shown signs of strengthening, with sales activity 
holding up fairly well, prices rising moderately, and in-
ventories generally stable. Similarly, the sales market in 
upstate New York has remained solid, with inventories 
steady at very low levels, prices running moderately 
ahead of a year earlier, and homes selling fairly quickly.   
The residential rental market has remained on a positive 
trend. Rent growth has slowed in New York City’s outer 
boroughs, as many newly developed properties have 
come on line. In Manhattan, rents have risen modestly, 
mainly at the high end. A local real estate expert attribut-
ed this to a shift from purchasing to renting, as well as a 
decline in investor interest. Rental vacancy rates remain 
quite low across New York City, though the shadow 
inventory is reported to be somewhat higher. Landlord 
concessions remain fairly sizable on new apartments. 
Commercial real estate markets across the District have 
continued to soften. Office availability rates have climbed 
modestly throughout New York State, while they have 
been steady in northern New Jersey. Office rents have 
remained essentially flat across the District. Industrial 
markets have been mixed: rents have continued to trend 
up, though at a decelerating pace, while availability rates 
have edged up. The market for retail space has contin-
ued to soften, with asking rents drifting down and vacan-
cy rates rising to multi-year highs. 
New multi-family construction starts have picked up 
across the District, while ongoing multi-family construc-
tion activity has remained brisk. New office and industrial 
construction has continued to weaken modestly.    
Banking and Finance 
Financial sector contacts generally noted further weak-
ening in activity and expressed ongoing concern about a 
deteriorating business climate. Small to medium-sized 
banks across the District reported increased demand for 
all categories of loans, except commercial and industrial. 
Refinancing activity was little changed. Banks reported 
narrowing spreads, unchanged credit standards, and 
stable delinquency rates across all major loan catego-
ries. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate Third District business activity edged back to a slight pace of growth during the current Beige Book period. 
Manufacturing slowed to a slight pace of growth, and financial services slowed to a modest pace. On balance, nonfinan-
cial services continued growing modestly, but the pace seemed to ebb a bit. Nonresidential construction declined slight-
ly after holding steady in the prior period. In contrast, homebuilders and auto dealers experienced slight-to-modest 
growth after a prior period of slight decline and no growth, respectively. Commercial leasing activity held steady, and 
sales of existing homes continued to decline at a moderate pace. Labor markets remained excessively tight throughout 
the District, and wages continued growing moderately. While contacts describe increased wage pressure, they contin-
ued to report slight employment increases. Overall, price pressures remained modest. The firms’ outlook for growth over 
the next six months remained positive, though cautious, and broadened further among nonmanufacturing firms.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow slightly during the current 
Beige Book period. About two-thirds of the nonmanufac-
turing firms and four-fifths of the manufacturers reported 
no change in staff. While the share of manufacturers 
reporting a higher number of employees fell, the share 
among the much larger nonmanufacturing sector rose 
somewhat. Average work hours have continued to edge 
down since the prior period at manufacturing firms but 
rebounded at nonmanufacturing firms.  
The firms continued to report tight labor market condi-
tions. Lack of available labor has constrained production 
and expansion plans, according to various manufactur-
ing and service-sector firms. Staffing firms reported 
continued demand for new job placements from clients 
but an insufficient supply of qualified labor to fill the 
orders. Turnover rates are rising, and nonstandard shifts 
are most difficult to fill. One staffing contact noted that 
some clients simply canceled orders from the fall that 
had gone unfilled. Another noted that a new hire took 
another job during the firm’s onboarding orientation.  
On balance, wage growth continued at a moderate pace, 
and many contacts noted a resumption of rising wage 
pressure. One staffing firm reported that its wage rates 
were up 4 to 5 percent year over year. Another staffing 
firm noted that $15 an hour was now the minimum re-
quired to attract workers for a manufacturing/
warehousing job but that these workers were being 
drawn from other employers. On average, the share of 
nonmanufacturing contacts who reported increases in 
wage and benefit costs remained near 44 percent; just 3 
percent reported decreases.  
Prices  
Most firms continued to report modest increases for both 
input prices and prices received for their own goods and 
services. However, the share of nonmanufacturers re-
porting higher prices paid rose significantly – well above 
its average. The share of firms reporting no change in 
prices rose to about three-fourths for manufacturers but 
fell to about half for nonmanufacturers.  
Looking ahead six months, the anticipation of higher 
prices has broadened among manufacturers. About half 
of the firms expected higher prices; almost none ex-
pected prices to fall. This was true for prices firms ex-
pected to pay as well as for prices firms expected to 
receive for their own goods.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturers reported slight growth in 
activity – easing from the modest pace reported during 
the prior period. The percentage of firms reporting in-
creases in shipments and new orders slipped to one-
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
third; the percentage reporting decreases also dipped for 
shipments but rose to one-fourth for new orders.  
Comments remain mixed. Primary metals firms contin-
ued to note that some customers are beginning to 
source parts domestically again. However, downstream 
fabricators continued to note uncertainty, delayed or 
canceled expansions, and fewer orders from their cus-
tomers. One contact did note that settling the new trade 
agreement with Canada and Mexico provided greater 
certainty and should increase some domestic production. 
Manufacturers’ expectations of activity over the next six 
months eased somewhat. Expectations of shipments 
and of new orders edged lower but remained above long
-term nonrecession averages. Planned capital spending 
also fell, yet expectations of future employment increas-
es rose.  
Consumer Spending 
Contacts for malls and convenience stores continued to 
report modest growth in nonauto retail sales. Although 
the holiday sales season began late this year, mall store 
operators noted that activity appeared strong from Black 
Friday through mid-December across most retail seg-
ments. Mall shoppers seemed to focus on a single 
store’s promotion, then make return trips for other stores’ 
sales. Contacts also noted that shoppers are increasing-
ly returning their online sales to local stores, which has 
boosted mall traffic. Convenience store contacts contin-
ued to report modest sales growth and no lull in the 
morning coffee runs of construction workers. Retailers 
expressed positive outlooks for 2020.  
Most auto dealers reported that sales were flat to up 
slightly, although the pace appeared to wane near year-
end. Dealers noted that sales were stronger in more 
profitable segments, such as SUVs, than in sedans. The 
profitable used car market also remained strong. Early 
estimates of total 2019 sales growth were positive for 
most New Jersey and Pennsylvania dealers, and they 
expressed optimism for another good sales year in 2020.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, activity at service-sector firms continued at 
a modest pace of growth. However, activity weakened a 
bit, as the percentage of firms reporting increases in new 
orders decreased significantly, while the share of firms 
reporting decreases in current revenues doubled. Pro-
posed tariffs on European wine prompted an area mer-
chant to stock up with over 35,000 cases to beat the 
February sanction and minimize price hikes. Over two-
thirds of the firms – more than in the prior period – ex-
pect growth over the next six months.  
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth in overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) on a year-over-year 
basis – a bit slower than in the prior period. Credit card 
lending also edged back to a modest pace.  
During the current period (reported without seasonal 
adjustments), volumes appeared to grow robustly for 
home mortgages and commercial real estate, and mod-
estly for other consumer loans (not elsewhere classified). 
Home equity lines and commercial and industrial loan 
volumes declined, while auto lending appeared flat.  
Banking contacts continued to express few concerns 
over credit quality; however, one contact noted that 
mortgage delinquencies had ticked up but were still at 
good levels. Of greater concern was an observation that 
as interest rates fell, many homeowners took additional 
cash with their refinanced mortgages – raising the ques-
tion for banking contacts of whether the cash was for 
additional investment or was taken out of necessity to 
pay down other debt. Most banking contacts remained 
optimistic about continued growth through 2020.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported a pickup to modest growth in 
contract signings, noting ongoing strength in 55+ com-
munities and renewed interest in the luxury market. 
Apartment and condo construction has helped offset the 
difficulty of building affordable single-family units.  
Existing home sales continued to decline moderately on 
a year-over-year basis across most local markets, with 
exceptions of slight growth at the Jersey shore. Inventory 
constraints persisted. An area broker confirmed that 
potential listings of existing homes may be lost to inves-
tors converting houses to rentals and to developers 
razing houses, then rebuilding new units, to a greater 
degree than normal, especially in Philadelphia.  
On balance, commercial real estate construction ap-
peared to ease slightly, while leasing activity held steady 
– both at relatively high levels. Contacts reported contin-
ued strength in the industrial market, with ongoing de-
mand for new construction; however, a few contacts 
noted that some warehouses are not being used to 
capacity. Most contacts remain optimistic about office 
space leasing and construction, but one noted that Phila-
delphia’s construction activity has fallen slightly and may 
remain a bit below prior-year levels. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fourth District economy continued to expand at a modest, relatively steady pace recently. The growth resulted from 
continuing strength in a few key sectors and waning drags from manufacturing and freight. As has been the case for 
several reporting periods, professional and business services firms provided a steady source of support for the broader 
economy. Construction and real estate activity remained strong, on balance, particularly on the nonresidential side. 
Meanwhile, consumer spending picked up as the holiday shopping season progressed. Bankers indicated that loan 
demand was stable on net. Although manufacturing activity did not expand during the reporting period, it did not con-
tract either, as it had for much of 2019 as factories adjusted to weaker global economic growth and trade-related uncer-
tainties. Turning to the outlook, firms remained optimistic about demand for their goods and services in coming months, 
albeit a little less optimistic than during the prior reporting period. Labor demand remained firm, while wages and selling 
prices increased at a modest pace.  
Employment and Wages  
On balance, aggregate employment increased slightly in 
recent weeks. Professional and business services firms 
continued to add workers because demand for their 
services increased from already robust levels. At the 
same time, construction and real estate firms suggested 
that labor demand remained solid at a time of year when 
firms are often experiencing a seasonal slowdown in 
construction and sales. Reports from manufacturers 
suggest that payrolls were relatively stable as demand 
for factory goods was flat. Retailers indicated that sea-
sonal hiring was largely unchanged from a year earlier. 
Outside of a seasonal pickup in hiring for holiday fulfill-
ment, transportation and freight contacts generally sug-
gested that employment was flat to down in the sector. 
Some lenders reduced payrolls because overall loan 
demand was flat and they sought to increase efficien-
cies. Looking forward, firms were more bullish about 
their near-term hiring expectations than they were during 
the prior reporting period.   
Wages increased at a modest pace, on net, similar to 
that of the prior reporting period. Firms across most 
industry segments reported that wages were increasing, 
particularly in geographies and occupations where com-
petition for workers was significant. A few firms reported 
paying higher yearend bonuses, and one implemented a 
new profit-sharing plan to help retain workers.  
Prices  
On average, selling prices in the District rose modestly in 
recent weeks. Output price increases were most often 
reported by contacts in the retail, professional and busi-
ness services, and construction industries because of 
persistent strength in demand. By contrast, manufactur-
ers indicated that output prices continued to move lower, 
although at a slower pace, while a downward trend in 
freight prices paused recently. Nonlabor input costs 
increased at a slightly faster pace in recent weeks.  
Retailers said that tariffs continued to put upward pres-
sure on costs, as did increases in some commodity 
prices. Higher food prices were reported by a few restau-
ranteurs. Freight contacts noted materially higher 
(nonhealthcare) insurance costs because insurance 
claims against trucking companies have increased dra-
matically while insurance capacity has dwindled. Manu-
facturers indicated that, on balance, materials costs have 
stabilized after trending lower in earlier months. Mean-
while, reports from professional and business services 
firms suggest that upward (nonlabor) cost pressures may 
have eased somewhat. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased solidly; retailers reported 
significant sales gains that exceeded the typical holiday 
season pickup. One large department store contact said 
that Black Friday turnout lifted November sales to 
“abnormally strong” levels. Furthermore, auto retailers 
reported that new-vehicle sales were up 10 percent from 
a year earlier, boosted by manufacturers’ incentives and 
strong performance of the stock market. Most retailers 
expected sales to slow back to normal levels heading 
into the first quarter of 2020. A hospitality contact indicat-
ed that investment in local construction projects had 
boosted demand for hotel rooms in his region. 
Manufacturing 
The overall level of manufacturing activity did not change 
meaningfully, but individual firms’ reports varied consid-
erably. Several contacts indicated that demand in-
creased as the year drew to a close. Moreover, they 
seemed optimistic about the near-term outlook for de-
mand and planned their capital expenditures according-
ly. Meanwhile, others noted that ongoing trade-related 
uncertainty, weak industrial activity, and a typical sea-
sonal slowdown constrained demand. These manufac-
turers indicated that their backlogs were soft, and they 
relayed reports that their customers did not expect that 
demand would soon return to levels seen in recent 
years. To cope with weaker demand, these manufactur-
ers were watching spending carefully, resulting in less 
ambitious capital spending plans, reduced hours for 
workers, and less use of workers from temporary help 
agencies.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Overall construction and real estate activity edged up in 
recent weeks in spite of a typical seasonal slowdown in 
some segments. This seasonal slowdown was particular-
ly notable on the residential side where both homebuild-
ers and residential real estate contacts indicated that 
cold weather and the holidays combined to slow activity 
as 2019 drew to a close. However, one residential broker 
indicated that while sales activity slowed from two 
months earlier, it remained more robust than during the 
same period a year earlier. 
By contrast, nonresidential builders and real estate firms 
indicated that demand remained very firm in spite of the 
expected seasonal slowdown. One contractor summa-
rized the sentiment in the industry by stating that “times 
are good and people are building.” On the commercial 
real estate side, one contact indicated that growth in 
some of his economically vibrant markets was being 
augmented by emerging growth in one of his lagging 
metro markets. Another said that rising costs for new 
construction helped boost leasing activity because ten-
ants sought lower-cost alternatives to new construction. 
On balance, nonresidential construction and real estate 
activity was expected to remain robust into 2020.  
Financial Services 
Reports from bankers were mixed but generally pointed 
to flat loan demand. Lower interest rates spurred an 
uptick in auto loan demand and home mortgage activity. 
However, that growth was offset by weaker demand for 
business loans. Bankers expected that the first quarter of 
2020 would remain soft, citing the usual seasonal fac-
tors. Most bankers indicated that core deposits in-
creased, but several noted that this was typical at the 
end of the calendar year.    
Professional and Business Services 
Activity in the professional and business services sector 
held steady at robust levels since the previous report.  
Most industry contacts indicated there had been no 
recent changes in their activity levels, although a con-
sulting firm in the online commerce industry reported a 
significant improvement in business conditions over the 
holiday period. A wealth advisor noted a slight increase 
in activity in recent months and identified his clients’ 
confidence in the economic outlook for 2020 as the 
driving factor. Overall, the majority of contacts in profes-
sional and business services expected favorable condi-
tions to persist into the first quarter of 2020.  
Freight 
Reports from the transportation sector remained mixed 
but generally pointed to a slower contraction in freight 
volumes. Contacts commonly indicated that overall 
freight volumes remained lower in most industries and 
noted that the fall shipping season as a whole was softer 
than normal. Freight executives cited low commodity 
prices and tariffs on imported goods from China as fac-
tors contributing to the ongoing weakness. Several 
freight firms reported increases in their freight volumes 
since the previous report. However, these companies 
cited improved internal management and advertising as 
the drivers of the gains rather than a broader strengthen-
ing in demand. Expectations for future freight activity 
remained soft. ■ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Overall, the Fifth District economy grew moderately in recent weeks. Manufacturing activity, however, softened slightly as 
firms continued to face headwinds from tariffs, other trade policies, and labor availability. Port activity varied by commodi-
ty, while trucking shipments rose modestly, compared to recent months, but remained below last year’s level. Travel and 
tourism grew moderately, with particular strength in business travel. In addition, retailers reported moderate growth in 
sales as holiday shopping was even with or above the year-ago level. Home sales and mortgage lending remained fairly 
strong, as were commercial real estate leasing and construction. Business lending, according to bankers, was modest, 
as some firms were reluctant to invest due to uncertainty. Nonfinancial services firms gave mixed reports with some 
education and health services firms reporting growth while firms providing professional and business services reported 
softer demand. Farmers generally had good crop yields and solid demand in recent weeks, but faced tighter margins. 
The demand for labor remained strong across skill levels, and wage increases were moderate. Price growth picked up 
slightly for services, but remained muted, overall.  
 
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor remained strong in recent weeks 
and businesses continued to report labor shortages 
across skill levels. The tight labor market led some 
firms to increase benefits and wages, ease background 
screening requirements, and invest in labor-saving 
technology. To retain workers, firms have increased 
wages, training, and talent development. Overall, wage 
increases were moderate with some larger raises cited 
for specific job categories, such as electricians and 
other skilled trades.  
Prices  
On balance, price growth remained moderate since our 
previous Beige Book report. Manufacturers reported 
little change in annual growth of prices paid and prices 
received in recent weeks with both increasing at rates 
slightly below two percent, on average. Several manu-
facturers said that tariffs continued to impact the cost of 
raw materials. Meanwhile, services sector firms report-
ed an uptick in price growth for prices paid and prices 
received, with both exceeding two percent but remain-
ing within a moderate range.  
 
 
Manufacturing 
Fifth District manufacturing softened somewhat since our 
last report. On balance, contacts reported drops in both 
shipments and new orders. Many manufacturers cited 
uncertainty regarding trade policies as a major concern. 
Several increased prices of final goods but struggled 
with low profit margins due to tariffs on raw materials. 
Some manufacturers saw strong demand but had output 
constrained by labor shortages. However, a Virginia food 
manufacturer met demand by and investing in new 
equipment.    
Ports and Transportation 
Import and export volumes varied by commodity in re-
cent weeks. For example, port contacts noted a decline 
in soybean exports to Asia, but expected shipments to 
rise after an announced trade deal with China. Exports of 
metals and hardware to Europe were weak, but pork 
exports were strong. Imports of furniture and other com-
modities were soft, but auto and apparel imports re-
mained strong. Despite continued concerns about trade 
policy, port executives were optimistic and continued to 
invest in capital expansion projects.  
 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Fifth District trucking rates continued to soften, and while 
shipments were lower than last year, they were slightly 
above the previous few months. Retail shipments were 
fairly strong for the holiday season. Some trucking com-
panies picked up both business and labor from a major 
company closure as well as from continued closures of 
smaller companies. Low fuel prices helped margins 
amid softening rates, but one executive is struggling 
with increasing costs of liability insurance. Trucking firms 
expressed concerns about political uncertainty going 
into an election year, but continued to make long-term 
investments and were optimistic that business would 
remain solid.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Overall, Fifth District travel and tourism grew moderately 
since our last report. Business travel was particularly 
strong. Hotel rates and occupancy generally remained 
solid around most of the District amid high demand, 
even as more rooms opened. One exception was a 
hotel in Greenville, South Carolina, that attributed a drop 
in occupancy to increased supply of both hotels and 
short-term rental properties. Additionally, hotels in 
Charleston, West Virginia, reported low occupancy 
despite stronger tourism in the state as a whole.  
Retailers in the Fifth District reported moderate sales in 
recent weeks. Stores had solid customer traffic for the 
holidays, and many retailers reported that holiday sales 
were level with or up from last year. Auto dealers had 
increasing sales, amid high manufacturer incentives, 
and noted a shift towards smaller down payments and 
longer term financing. Some dealers said that rising 
costs were leading them to raise prices, and there were 
mild concerns about tariffs and online competition. How-
ever, other dealers have continued to invest and ex-
pand, as they expect to see strong growth in 2020.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales in the Fifth District remained fairly strong in 
recent weeks, apart from a slight seasonal softening. 
Some real estate agents noted an increase in days on 
the market as home prices rose but said activity is 
strong overall. Inventory levels remained low, particular-
ly in lower price ranges. Demand for construction of new 
homes was high, but construction was limited by availa-
bility of workers. Contacts expected buyer traffic and 
demand to increase in the coming months. 
Commercial real estate leasing remained strong since 
our last report. Brokers reported strong demand for 
industrial and retail space but slightly lower demand for 
office leasing. Occupancy of multifamily properties in-
creased. Rental rates were generally described as 
steady to increasing slightly across property types. Office 
vacancy rates were stable, although some brokers ex-
pect them to increase in the coming months. Commercial 
real estate sales and sale prices showed modest growth, 
boosted by low interest rates, and construction remained 
strong across most types of properties, even though 
construction costs are high.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan demand grew slightly in recent weeks. 
Bankers said that moderate growth in residential mort-
gages and commercial real estate loans was due, at 
least in part, to low rates. Although some bankers noted 
that the number of C&I loans in the pipeline rose mod-
estly, a few respondents stated that firms seem to be 
holding back on capital spending. On balance, residen-
tial refinancing activity, home equity lines, and other 
consumer loans grew modestly. Applicant credit quality 
and loan delinquencies were reportedly unchanged, but 
bankers reported a slight decline in underwriting stand-
ards. Core deposits remained unchanged despite com-
ments about increased competition from non-bank finan-
cial institutions.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports from nonfinancial services firms were mixed. 
Universities reported growth in healthcare, IT, and com-
puter science programs. Also, a health service provider 
experienced growth and investment in ambulatory and 
urgent care facilities. A marketing firm, on the other 
hand, reported a slowdown that was partly due to the 
holidays and partly because potential clients were taking 
a long time to make decisions. In addition, a couple of 
firms in D.C. noted that political uncertainties, including a 
potential government shutdown, hampered demand for 
IT consulting and teleservices.  
Natural Resources 
Recent reports on the natural resources sector varied. 
Agriculture contacts were mostly positive because of 
good crop yields and solid demand; however, farmers 
faced tighter profit margins due to low selling prices and 
rising prices for labor, equipment, and land. Coal produc-
tion reportedly picked up slightly, but several firms re-
main in bankruptcy proceedings. Finally, the oil and gas 
industry was negatively affected by low selling prices, 
excess supply, and stalled pipeline construction. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, economic activity in the Sixth District expanded at a modest pace since the previous report, and the outlook 
among contacts remained positive. Labor market tightness continued to limit growth in some sectors. Wage pressures 
persisted for lower-skilled positions, and some contacts expect higher wages in the coming year. In line with expecta-
tions, nonlabor costs continued to slowly rise. Retailers cited healthy holiday sales levels; however, automotive dealers 
saw relatively flat sales levels compared to a year earlier. District tourism contacts noted strong leisure travel activity. 
Residential real estate conditions continued to improve, and commercial real estate firms cited steady sales and leasing 
activity. Manufacturing activity decelerated as new order levels fell slightly and production levels declined. District bank-
ers noted that financial conditions remained healthy, and the pace of loan growth was positive. 
Employment and Wages 
Firms reported that attracting and retaining quality talent 
remained a challenge, which, for employers in the con-
struction, banking, technology, and food services indus-
tries, continued to limit growth. While some manufactur-
ing contacts also described this as a challenge, other 
manufacturers reported a slowing pace of hiring over the 
reporting period. Businesses reported continuing to 
explore new recruiting and retention tactics, such as 
offering a variety of benefits, paying for training and 
certifications, and clearly demonstrating potential career 
paths. Many firms continued to pursue investments in 
automation and technology, which are expected to ulti-
mately reduce headcount requirements. 
On average, firms maintained merit increases of 2.5-4 
percent, though wage pressure continued to build for 
lower-skilled positions. Some contacts indicated they 
expect wages and health insurance costs to accelerate 
in 2020. 
Prices 
As reported previously, nonlabor costs continued to rise, 
although still in line with expectations. Contacts noted 
pricing power with goods impacted by tariffs and in con-
struction. Some contacts reported that the use of pricing 
transparency tools by consumers and businesses was 
causing downward pricing pressure. The Atlanta Fed’s 
Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-
over-year unit costs were up 1.6 percent in December. 
Survey respondents indicated they expect unit costs to 
rise 1.9 percent over the next twelve months. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
In line with expectations, District retailers reported 
healthy sales levels during the holiday season. Online 
sales levels continued to dominate overall sales activity. 
Automotive dealers reported relatively flat sales levels in 
November compared to the same period last year. 
On balance, District travel and tourism contacts noted a 
strong holiday travel season with year-over-year growth 
in leisure travel. The outlook for 2020 remained positive 
with healthy advance bookings through the first quarter 
of the year. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Low mortgage rates continued to help support demand 
for housing across much of the District. Price apprecia-
tion was firm while single-family sales were up from the 
previous year. The limited inventory of existing homes 
for sale, as well as the level of starts, suggested that 
supply remained constrained. Some contacts noted 
concerns that further price appreciation and low invento-
ries may adversely affect affordability, despite low inter-
est rates. Mortgage loan quality remained stable across 
the District, although Mississippi saw a slight uptick in 
delinquencies over the past year. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Commercial real estate (CRE) contacts reported leasing 
and sales activity remained steady during the reporting 
period, although some contacts mentioned growing 
uncertainty as a concern. Overall, most sectors experi-
enced positive dynamics as rents continued to grow and 
vacancies trended downward at a modest pace. Howev-
er, some CRE contacts did report that continued growth 
in construction costs was impacting the start of a modest 
number of new projects. Contacts continued to report 
that capital for CRE projects was readily available via 
banks and non-bank entities, with non-bank entities 
remaining aggressive in financing both construction and 
stabilized CRE projects. Modestly growing amounts of 
leverage, loosening of underwriting standards, and an 
increase in covenant-lite structures were noted.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing firms reported a deceleration in overall 
business activity since the last reporting period. New 
order levels fell slightly and notable decreases in produc-
tion levels were reported. Finished inventory levels de-
clined, and purchasing managers noted that supply 
delivery wait times were slightly longer. Optimism for 
future production levels increased among manufacturing 
contacts, with just over one-quarter of contacts expecting 
higher levels of production over the next six months, 
compared to one-fifth in the last reporting period. 
Transportation 
District transportation firms cited mixed results since the 
previous report. Port contacts reported sustained growth 
in the shipments of containers, automobiles, and heavy 
equipment. Logistics firms noted substantial increases in 
ecommerce activity over the reporting period as com-
pared with year-earlier levels. District railroads, however, 
noted continued year-over-year softness in freight vol-
umes across most commodities, and further declines in 
intermodal traffic. Air cargo carriers saw lower year-over-
year freight volumes. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at District financial institutions remained 
healthy. Earnings improved over the previous quarter as 
increases in noninterest income helped offset an ongo-
ing decline in the net interest margin. Asset quality re-
mained stable as most financial institutions reported that 
they resisted loosening underwriting standards despite 
increased competition. Though moderating, loan growth 
continued to be positive. 
Energy  
Oil and gas contacts indicated that production was 
steady to slightly up over the reporting period; however, 
firms that service oil-producing wells reported slowing 
activity. Some chemical manufacturers described contin-
ued softening in output, largely related to declining activi-
ty in manufactured goods sectors in addition to soft 
global economic growth. Strong growth continued in the 
renewable energy sector, particularly in wind and solar. 
Utilities contacts reported slowing momentum among 
certain industrial segments. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained mixed. Recent rains 
improved drought conditions for most of the District, 
although parts of Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana experi-
enced abnormally dry or moderate drought conditions. 
The December production forecast for Florida's orange 
crop was unchanged while the grapefruit production 
forecast increased; both forecasts remain ahead of last 
year's production. On a year-over-year basis, prices paid 
to farmers in November were up for corn, rice, soybeans, 
eggs, and milk but down for cotton and broilers; beef 
prices were unchanged. However, on a month-over-
month basis, prices increased for cotton, rice, beef, 
eggs, and milk but declined for corn, soybeans and 
broilers. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased modestly overall in late November and December, and contacts 
expected growth to continue at a similar pace over the next 12 months. Consumer spending increased modestly, while 
business spending and construction and real estate activity increased slightly. Manufacturing and employment were little 
changed. Wages and prices rose slightly and financial conditions improved modestly. The prospects of a trade deal with 
China boosted farmers’ outlooks. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment was little changed over the reporting period, 
though contacts expected a modest rate of growth over 
the next 12 months. Current hiring remained focused on 
professional and technical, sales, and managerial work-
ers. As they have for some time, contacts indicated that 
the labor market was tight and that it was difficult to fill 
positions at all skill levels. Manufacturers facing slow 
demand again reported cutting hours rather than laying 
off workers because they were worried the tight labor 
market would make it too difficult to hire when demand 
recovered. A staffing firm reported a moderate increase 
in billable hours. Wages increased slightly. Contacts 
were most likely to report increases for administrative, 
professional and technical, and managerial workers. 
Multiple contacts reported greater wage pressures for 
entry-level workers. Benefit costs increased modestly. 
Prices 
Prices increased slightly in late November and Decem-
ber, and contacts expected modest increases over the 
next 12 months. Retail prices increased slightly overall. 
One contact noted a small pickup in grocery price infla-
tion. In addition, the contact reported that retailers were 
passing a greater share of freight- and tariff-related costs 
onto customers. Producer prices edged up, with contacts 
generally reporting small growth in input costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Nonauto retail sales were up modestly, with 
gains reported in the electronics, entertainment, furni-
ture, and jewelry sectors. Overall, holiday sales met 
retailers’ expectations. Contacts again reported strong 
growth in e-commerce and slow growth for brick and 
mortar general merchandise stores. New and used light 
vehicle sales increased moderately. Contacts continued 
to report shortages of GM replacement parts following 
the UAW strike. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in late November 
and December. Retail inventories were generally com-
fortable, though GM dealers reported that restocking 
following the end of the UAW strike was proceeding 
slower than expected. Most manufacturers indicated that 
inventories were at comfortable levels and fewer con-
tacts noted higher-than-desired levels. One heavy ma-
chinery dealer reported elevated inventory due to slower 
sales. Capital spending increased slightly and contacts 
expected a modest increase in spending over the next 
12 months. Current outlays were primarily for IT equip-
ment and intellectual property. Three-quarters of con-
tacts reported that their newly purchased capital was 
intended to increase capacity. Demand for transportation 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
services declined slightly. Energy usage edged down, 
largely due to lower demand from the industrial sector. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Overall, construction and real estate activity increased 
slightly over the reporting period. Residential construc-
tion contacts reported a small increase in building. Resi-
dential real estate activity was unchanged, as growing 
demand for starter homes was offset by declining de-
mand for high-end homes. Home prices and rents in-
creased slightly. Nonresidential construction activity was 
little changed, and contacts again noted that rising costs 
were holding back growth. Commercial real estate activi-
ty increased slightly on top of a strong level. Contacts 
highlighted growth in the flex-office and industrial sectors 
but continued to report difficulties for big box and mall 
retailers. Rents ticked higher, vacancy rates inched 
lower, and the availability of sublease space increased 
marginally. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production was flat in late November and 
December. Steel demand increased slightly, supported 
by increased demand from the auto sector following the 
end of the GM strike. Auto production was little changed 
overall, but continued at a solid level. GM suppliers 
reported that orders returned in line with expectations 
after the strike ended. Demand for heavy trucks de-
creased, and contacts expected continued declines over 
the next year. Heavy machinery manufacturers reported 
modest increases in sales. Demand for specialty metals 
was flat overall, with increased orders from the aero-
space, defense, and energy sectors offset by decreased 
orders from the agriculture and heavy trucks sectors. 
Manufacturers of building materials reported little change 
in sales. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly over the report-
ing period. Participants in the equity and bond markets 
reported moderately better conditions, citing lower inter-
est rates, “stabilization” of the yield curve, and progress 
in trade talks between the US and China as positive 
developments. Business loan demand decreased slightly 
overall, with contacts reporting a slowdown in commer-
cial real estate activity. Loan quality deteriorated slightly, 
but standards were little changed. Consumer loan de-
mand increased modestly, led by continued growth in 
mortgage refinancing; loan quality and standards were 
little changed. 
 
 
Agriculture 
The prospects of a trade deal with China created some 
optimism in the farm sector. One contact called the 
potential deal a “key market driver.” The final results for 
the 2019 harvest varied from average to well below 
normal across the District, yet they were better than had 
been expected in light of poor weather during both plant-
ing and harvesting. Corn and soybean prices moved 
higher, with both prices above year-ago levels. That 
said, lower-than-usual corn quality and higher-than-usual 
drying costs cut into crop farmers’ profits. Overall, with 
extra government payments boosting farm income, the 
District’s agricultural sector was in about the same finan-
cial shape as it was a year ago. Increases in milk and 
cattle prices provided a boost to dairy and livestock 
producers. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts indicate that economic conditions have slightly improved since our previous report. Firms report-
ed employment levels were unchanged. Overall, wage pressures have increased moderately, with contacts citing mini-
mum wage increases as a contributing factor. Reports on consumer spending were generally positive, although reports 
on holiday sales were mixed. Activity in the manufacturing sector continued to decline, although there are signs of stabi-
lization. District banking contacts reported positive growth in loan volumes. Agriculture conditions remain unchanged, 
although overall conditions remain weak in this sector. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has remained largely unchanged since the 
previous reporting period. Contacts across the District 
frequently emphasized the tight labor market. Firms 
continue to raise benefits, lower hiring standards, auto-
mate positions, and increase existing employees’ re-
sponsibilities due to chronic worker shortages. However, 
many firms are hesitant to invest in training new employ-
ees, fearing that they would expend resources develop-
ing workers and lose them to better-paying jobs. Small 
and rural business contacts report having an especially 
difficult time recruiting workers. Survey-based indicators 
also continue to show employment declines in Missouri 
and Arkansas manufacturing. However, overall employ-
ment remains strong, with St. Louis contacts emphasiz-
ing that employers continue to expand their workforce 
whenever possible. 
Wages have increased moderately since the previous 
report. Contacts continued to link this to the tight labor 
market, raising wages to both attract new workers and 
limit turnover. Firms’ reported ability to raise wages 
remains positively related to their size, with smaller firms 
struggling to increase wages. Arkansas, Illinois, and 
Missouri minimum wage increases have also come into 
effect with the new year. Uncertainty over how this will 
impact market wages of various positions has led some 
Missouri contacts to delay hiring for at least a month. An 
Arkansas contact reported multiple retailers are hiring 
fewer workers to counteract the increase in labor costs. 
Prices  
Prices have increased slightly since the previous report. 
Business contacts noted that fuel and energy costs have 
been declining, and coal prices in particular have shown 
modest declines since the previous report. Auto industry 
contacts noted slight increases in the prices of used 
vehicles, but also the availability of more low-interest 
financing options with low down payments. 
Construction contacts reported that prior price increases 
from tariffs on building materials, such as steel and 
aluminum, have now been passed on to consumers. 
Steel prices have increased by 12 percent since the 
previous report, but are down 26 percent year over year. 
Contacts in the retail and restaurant industries said that 
prices were unchanged, but that increasing food prices 
are putting cost pressures on businesses. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hospi-
tality contacts indicate consumer activity has improved 
slightly since the previous report. November real sales 
tax collections increased in Missouri, West Tennessee, 
Arkansas, and Kentucky relative to a year ago. Consum-
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

H-2
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis  
er sentiment in West Tennessee regarding both current 
economic conditions and economic conditions over the 
next six months has improved since September. Little 
Rock area general retailers reported slight increases in 
business activity during the second half of 2019. St. 
Louis area general retailers had mixed accounts of sales 
over the holiday season, noting a strong shift toward 
online shopping. Little Rock area auto dealers reported 
steady sales over the previous quarter, and they contin-
ued to observe particularly strong demand in the used 
car market. St. Louis region hospitality contacts general-
ly reported that business activity met expectations over 
the holiday season, and they remain cautiously optimistic 
about the months ahead, encouraged by several major 
events taking place in the region during the first quarter 
of 2020. 
Manufacturing 
Overall manufacturing activity has declined slightly since 
our previous report. Survey-based indexes suggest that 
Arkansas manufacturing activity remained stable. New 
orders remained stable, while production decreased 
slightly from last month. Manufacturing activity in Mis-
souri declined relative to one month ago. New orders 
and production decreased slightly. Contacts in the steel 
and landscape equipment industries reported plans to 
increase capital investment in 2020. One large U.S. 
manufacturing company announced plans to open a 
manufacturing/distribution facility in the region. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the services sector has slightly improved since 
the previous report. The transportation industry has 
experienced increased activity since the previous report. 
Major logistics firms plan new distribution centers; how-
ever, one firm has announced layoffs. Traffic on water-
ways and highways is largely unchanged. Contacts 
noted falling river barge prices resulting from excess 
supply of river barges due to declining exports of soy-
beans. However, in airports, passenger traffic increased 
by 3 percent year-to-year. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has decreased slightly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales decreased modestly from October to November in 
Little Rock, decreased slightly in St. Louis and Memphis, 
and were unchanged in Louisville. Inventory levels in the 
region remained depressed.  
Residential construction activity increased slightly. There 
was a slight uptick in November permit activity across 
District MSAs relative to the previous month. Contacts in 
St. Louis reported that, while year-to-date permit levels 
are down slightly in the area compared with this time last 
year, builders remain confident that housing demand will 
remain robust due to low mortgage rates.  
Commercial construction activity has increased modestly 
since the previous report. The number of commercial 
construction projects increased moderately from October 
to November across most of the states in the District. A 
contact in Little Rock noted that they had never seen a 
construction boom as strong and as long-lasting as the 
current one.  
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have improved modest-
ly since the previous report. According to reports from 
bankers, outstanding loan volumes grew by 4 percent in 
the fourth quarter relative to one year ago, which was a 
departure from a recent slowing in the rate of loan 
growth. Commercial and industrial lending growth re-
mained stable, growing by 2 percent year-over-year. 
Commercial real estate lending maintained a positive 
and slightly slower growth rate compared with the previ-
ous quarter. Residential real estate lending also in-
creased slowly, which is in contrast to the prior quarter, 
when lending growth declined slightly. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions remain unchanged from 
the previous reporting period. The percentage of winter 
wheat in the District rated fair or better remained approx-
imately unchanged at 93 percent from the end of Octo-
ber to the end of November. This is roughly the same 
level of winter wheat rated fair or better at the end of 
2018. Contacts reported that continued low crop prices 
and trade disputes have harmed the industry. Several 
reports indicated the federal assistance to farmers via 
the market facilitation program has helped farmers re-
main in business. 
Natural resource extraction conditions improved modest-
ly from October to November, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production increasing 1.8 percent. November pro-
duction declined 7 percent from a year ago. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew at a modest pace since the last report. Employment was mixed across the region, 
while wage pressures were moderate overall and price pressures remained modest. The District economy saw growth 
in consumer spending, commercial construction and real estate, residential construction, and energy. Manufacturing 
and energy activity was flat. Residential real estate fell slightly, while agricultural conditions remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment was mixed since the last report. Minnesota 
and Wisconsin both saw seasonally adjusted 
employment fall in November, while other District states 
saw slight-to-moderate gains. Job postings rose by 
double digits in the Dakotas, but were lower in 
Minnesota and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula. 
Unemployment insurance initial claims were higher 
overall during the most recent six-week period (through 
mid-December) compared with the same period a year 
earlier, with claims increasing notably in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin, but falling in the Dakotas. A poll of Minnesota 
staffing firms by the Minneapolis Fed found that recent 
job orders and hours booked were modestly higher; 
unfilled job orders were also higher due to tight labor 
supply. Staffing contacts in eastern North Dakota and 
Michigan’s U.P. also said job orders were higher. A 
Montana staffing contact said job orders were lower, but 
the company has also been more selective. “We are no 
longer writing job orders we know we can’t fill.” A survey 
of employer hiring sentiment found more optimism 
across the District for the first quarter of 2020 compared 
with the same survey a year ago. However, two other 
regional hiring indexes that include Minnesota and the 
Dakotas had softer outlooks, including one that 
suggested contraction in manufacturing employment. A 
poll by the Minneapolis Fed of greater Minnesota firms 
found generally soft hiring activity, particularly compared 
with a similar poll in mid-2019.  
Wage pressures were moderate overall, with 
considerable variation. Fewer than half of staffing firms 
polled by the Minneapolis Fed said wages grew by more 
than 3 percent over the past 12 months, though more 
than 60 percent said they expected wage increases 
above 3 percent over the coming year. Close to 70 
percent of firms in the aforementioned greater Minnesota 
poll said wages grew by less than 3 percent over the 
past year, with future wage expectations only slightly 
higher. However, a contact in Michigan’s U.P. said 
housekeeping positions have recently seen wage 
increases of 10 percent or more, while a call center and 
manufacturer there increased wages by more than 5 
percent. A construction contact said workers were 
getting recruited regularly, and a 3 percent raise “isn’t 
good enough” to retain good employees. In contrast, a 
manufacturer of hardwood products with plants in 
Wisconsin that has been “significantly affected” by tariffs 
cut wages by 10 percent.  
Prices  
Price pressures remained modest since the previous 
report. Respondents to a recent survey of Minnesota 
economic development officials reported that retail prices 
among their business contacts were mostly little 
changed over the past year; however, the outlook for the 
coming year was for prices to increase slightly faster 
than normal. Retail fuel prices as of early January were 
slightly lower in most areas of the District relative to the 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
previous reporting period. Prices received by farmers in 
November increased from a year earlier for corn, 
soybeans, dry beans, milk, hogs, eggs, and turkeys, 
while cattle prices were unchanged and prices for wheat, 
hay, and chickens decreased.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer  spending increased moderately since the last 
report. Most reports on holiday shopping and other 
spending were positive. Sources in major markets in 
Montana and the Dakotas reported good foot traffic in 
stores. One source noted that a shorter holiday shopping 
season this year provided steadier business overall. But 
firms in greater Minnesota reported flat holiday sales. 
Gross sales in South Dakota saw a healthy bump in 
November compared with a year earlier, and the state’s 
gambling handle also increased by almost 4 percent. 
Sales tax collections in Minnesota grew by more than 3 
percent in November, but gross sales in Wisconsin saw 
a 4 percent decline. Poor snow conditions across much 
of Montana meant slower activity early in the ski season. 
Nevertheless, the broader winter skiing economy was 
reportedly “booming” in Montana, with resorts making 
significant capital investments in new lifts, 
accommodations, and other amenities. However, Snow 
conditions in northern Minnesota and Wisconsin were 
reportedly good in December, with “quite a few 
snowmobilers out on the trails” in some locations. Hotel 
occupancy rates and revenue per room in Minnesota 
rose slightly in November.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction grew modestly since the last 
report. Construction spending saw a notable uptick in 
November compared with a year earlier, according to an 
industry database, with increases seen in every District 
state except Wisconsin. A second industry database 
showed that the number of new and active projects over 
the most recent six-week period (through mid-
December) were notably higher than during the same 
period a year ago. Commercial permitting in the District’s 
larger markets in November saw a modest increase 
overall compared with a year earlier, with Rapid City and 
Sioux Falls, S.D., continuing to see strong activity 
overall. Individual contacts have generally reported 
strong backlogs. A Minnesota contact said commercial 
construction was “bouncing along the top,” and while 
there was some expectation of a possible decrease in 
2020, “the market is still operating at high levels.” 
Residential construction grew modestly overall. The 
value of November residential permits was widely higher, 
with the notable exception of Minneapolis-St. Paul, which 
broke a string of months with robust single- and 
multifamily permitting.  
Commercial real estate was modestly higher. Vacancy 
rates in most subsectors in Minneapolis-St. Paul 
remained stable. Despite persistent new construction of 
multifamily units, continued low vacancy rates have led 
to rising rents—roughly 5 percent in the past 12 months, 
according to one source. Residential real estate fell 
slightly overall, with mixed sales activity across the 
District in November compared with a year earlier. 
Northern and western counties of Wisconsin located in 
the District saw higher sales, and Great Falls, Mont., saw 
particularly robust activity. However, sales in Minnesota 
were largely flat, while small declines were seen in 
Bozeman and Missoula, Mont., and Sioux Falls, S.D. 
Fargo and Grand Forks, N.D., experienced larger 
declines.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity was flat on balance from 
the last report. Preliminary results from a survey of Ninth 
District manufacturers indicated that firms generally 
reported a slight decrease in orders, production, and 
investment over the past year. However, expectations for 
the coming year were generally positive. An index of 
manufacturing conditions indicated increased activity in 
December compared with a month earlier in South 
Dakota, while activity was nearly flat in Minnesota and 
decreased in North Dakota. In contrast, a Montana 
staffing contact reported that manufacturers were 
increasing their hiring late in the year. Producers of 
construction inputs also reported solid recent sales.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak. Industry 
contacts reported that trade conflicts combined with poor 
weather put continued pressure on farm households, 
with federal aid payments and insurance the only source 
of relief for many producers. One contact called 2019 
“the mother of all disasters.” In contrast, a dairy industry 
source reported that the sector has begun to rebound, 
and producers were becoming more bullish; Montana 
wheat producers also had a strong year. District oil and 
gas exploration activity was steady since the previous 
report. The number of active drilling rigs as of early 
January fell slightly from a month earlier, but the most 
recent figures (as of October) indicated that oil 
production hit a new record.  ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity edged up in late November and December, although conditions remained mixed across 
sectors. Consumer spending rose modestly, driven by robust retail sales during the holiday shopping season. Contacts in 
the wholesale trade and professional and high-tech services sectors also reported modestly higher sales, while sales in 
the transportation sector decreased. Manufacturers continued to note slight declines in overall activity with ongoing weak-
ness in durable goods factory activity. District real estate conditions held steady since the previous survey period, and 
contacts expected conditions to remain stable moving forward. District energy activity fell further, and contacts expected 
further declines in the months ahead. The agriculture sector remained weak despite rising commodity prices, and higher 
revenue from rising prices was not expected to significantly improve farm finances. District employment rose modestly 
since the previous survey period while employee hours held steady, and labor shortages were cited as the single biggest 
problem among a majority of respondents. Wages continued to expand at a modest pace, and contacts expected moder-
ate growth in the months ahead. Services sector contacts continued to note higher input and selling prices since the 
previous survey period, while manufacturers and construction supply contacts noted slightly lower prices.           
Employment and Wages  
District employment rose modestly since the last survey 
period, while employee hours held steady. Contacts 
expected modest gains in employment and flat employee 
hours in the months ahead. Respondents in all reporting 
sectors noted job gains in late November and December, 
except for the transportation and manufacturing sectors. 
In addition, employment was above year-ago levels in all 
reporting sectors with the exception of the auto sales 
sector. 
A majority of survey contacts cited labor shortages as 
the single most important problem currently facing their 
business. Specifically, contacts noted shortages for 
hourly retail and food services positions, mechanics, 
truck drivers, skilled construction, software developers, 
pharmacists and nurse practitioners. Wages continued to 
rise modestly since the previous survey period, and 
moderate gains were expected in the months ahead.               
Prices  
Input and selling prices continued to rise modestly in late 
November and December in the services sector, while 
manufacturers and construction supply contacts noted 
slightly lower prices. Both input and selling prices were 
expected to increase in the months ahead for all services 
sectors, while manufacturers projected steady prices. 
Respondents in the retail trade sector reported modestly 
higher input prices and slightly lower selling prices, alt-
hough both were above year-ago levels. Input and sell-
ing prices rose modestly in the restaurant sector, and 
both were strongly higher than a year ago. Transporta-
tion contacts noted slightly higher input and selling prices 
since the previous survey, but expected selling prices to 
decline in the months ahead. Prices in the construction 
supply sector decreased slightly, but remained above 
year-ago levels. Construction supply prices were project-
ed to decrease modestly in the next few months. Manu-
facturers reported slightly lower prices of finished prod-
ucts and raw materials, but prices were expected to hold 
steady moving forward.               
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly in late Novem-
ber and December as gains in retail and auto sales 
offset spending declines in the restaurant and tourism 
sectors. Retail sales increased robustly during the holi-
day shopping season compared to both the previous 
survey period and year-ago levels. Contacts noted that 
lower-priced and promotionally priced items sold well, 
while higher-priced items sold poorly. Auto sales grew 
moderately this survey period, however sales were 
slightly below year-ago levels. A majority of auto re-
spondents noted a decrease in net profit compared to 
the previous year, and contacts anticipated sales to 
decline slightly in the coming months. Restaurant and 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
tourism sales dropped compared to the previous survey 
period, but remained above year-ago levels. Restaurant 
contacts anticipated strong sales growth in the coming 
months, while tourism contacts expected moderate gains 
in the months ahead.          
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to fall slightly in late 
November and December primarily due to ongoing con-
tractions in durable goods factory activity. However, 
manufacturers expected a slight increase in activity in 
the months ahead. Both durable and nondurable goods 
plants experienced decreases in production, but ship-
ments and new orders were up slightly at nondurable 
goods plants compared to the previous survey period. 
Capital spending was slightly above year-ago levels, and 
contacts anticipated this rate of growth to continue in the 
months ahead. 
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the transportation 
sector experienced modestly lower sales, while sales 
increased modestly for both the wholesale trade and 
professional and high-tech services sectors. Sales for all 
three sectors remained above year-ago levels. Contacts 
in the transportation sector anticipated sales to edge 
down in the coming months, whereas sales were ex-
pected to continue to rise in the wholesale trade and 
professional and high-tech services sectors.                
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity remained at similar levels to 
the previous survey period, and contacts expected con-
ditions to remain at current levels in the months ahead. 
Residential real estate sales continued to hold steady in 
late November and December compared to the previous 
survey period and to year-ago levels. Residential con-
struction activity also remained flat as housing starts 
rose while construction supply sales and traffic of poten-
tial buyers fell. Contacts in the residential construction 
sector expected overall activity to decline in the months 
ahead. Commercial real estate activity edged up as 
sales, absorption, construction underway, and comple-
tions rose while vacancy rates held steady. Expectations 
for commercial real estate activity were for its current 
pace of growth to continue over the next few months.   
 
 
 
 
 
  
Banking 
Overall loan demand decreased slightly since the previ-
ous survey period, although the change in demand was 
mixed across categories. Bankers indicated a slight 
decline in commercial real estate and agricultural loans 
and reported a modest decrease in consumer and com-
mercial and industrial loans. Demand for residential real 
estate loans increased slightly. Respondents indicated a 
slight improvement in loan quality compared to a year 
ago and expected a slight increase in loan quality over 
the next six months. Credit standards remained stable 
across all loan categories. Overall deposit levels in-
creased modestly, but a number of respondents indicat-
ed demand for certificate of deposits remained low dur-
ing the survey period.               
Energy 
District energy activity continued to decrease since the 
previous survey period, and expectations for future drill-
ing and business activity remained downbeat. While the 
number of active gas rigs held steady across District 
states, the number of active oil rigs eased lower. Oil and 
gas production slowed slightly, but remained at high 
levels. Employment in the energy sector was below 
levels from a year ago, and most regional firms expected 
additional decreases. Low commodity prices were listed 
as the biggest factor driving business plans over the next 
six months. Credit conditions for District energy firms 
also remained more difficult than a year ago. Despite 
lower profit levels and less drilling and business activity, 
District firms expected revenues to pick up over the next 
six months.                
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy generally remained 
subdued despite a modest increase in agricultural com-
modity prices. The prices of most major crops increased 
moderately since the previous reporting period and crop 
production in the Tenth District was expected to be simi-
lar to a year ago, resulting in expectations of slightly 
higher revenues compared with the previous year. In the 
livestock sector, cattle prices also increased modestly in 
December and hog prices remained relatively stable, 
which could provide additional support. The slight in-
crease in agricultural prices and revenues, however, was 
not expected to significantly improve the financial condi-
tion of producers in the District.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded solidly over the reporting period, with growth increasing in most sectors. The 
energy sector remained weak, although drilling activity ticked up. Home sales continued to rise, even beating some 
expectations. The agriculture picture remained mixed. Employment growth was moderate, and upward wage pressures 
continued as labor availability remained a key concern. Selling prices were largely flat, while input prices continued to 
rise. Outlooks generally improved, with reduced trade uncertainty boosting optimism. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment expanded at a moderate pace overall, 
although layoffs continued in the oil and gas sector. Most 
energy contacts expect headcounts to fall further in 
2020. Outside of the energy sector, hiring remained a 
key challenge for many companies, with some contacts 
expecting the lack of labor availability to continue to be a 
drag on business growth. Some contacts also mentioned 
that muted labor inflows from international and domestic 
sources were contributing to worker shortages.  
Wages continued to increase. A survey of more than 300 
Texas businesses showed that 2019 wage growth was 
3.9 percent, on average, down from 4.5 percent in 2018 
but about the same as in 2017. Expectations among 
surveyed firms were for 3.8 percent wage growth in 
2020, on average.  
Prices 
Input prices continued to rise, except in the energy sec-
tor where they remained near a cyclical bottom. Some 
contacts noted that progress on trade agreements de-
creased uncertainty around future costs. Selling prices 
were largely flat, although a slight pickup was seen in the 
service sector, particularly among retailers. Most con-
tacts expect increases in input costs to continue to out-
pace selling price increases in 2020. 
Manufacturing  
Modest expansion in the manufacturing sector resumed 
in December after stalling out in November. Most 
measures of manufacturing activity—including new 
orders and capital expenditures—ended the year on a 
slightly positive note. Food manufacturing was a particu-
lar bright spot, while energy-related manufacturing activi-
ty declined. 
Refinery utilization was steady, although refiners and 
chemical producers indicated that softening global de-
mand, tariffs, and ongoing trade policy uncertainty were 
keeping downward pressure on margins. Chemical con-
tacts noted that the phase-one trade agreement with 
China would remove tariffs from some forms of plastic 
but leave tariffs in place on many other products. 
Nearly two-thirds of manufacturing contacts expect high-
er production this year versus 2019, and uncertainty 
regarding outlooks abated notably at yearend.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales growth increased over the reporting period, 
led by auto dealers and nondurable goods wholesalers. 
Some contacts pointed to trade resolutions as a driver of 
increased retail activity. Retail outlooks improved nota-
bly. Half of retail contacts expect higher sales in 2020 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
versus 2019, and 35 percent expect sales to be about 
the same. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Solid expansion was seen in nonfinancial services activi-
ty, a slight pickup from the prior reporting period. Growth 
was led by transportation services, with small parcel 
cargo volumes posting particular strength. Staffing ser-
vices contacts indicated increased demand. Weaker 
activity centered on the softness in the oilfield.  
Outlooks continued to improve, although political uncer-
tainty remained a concern. Several contacts noted that 
the passage of the USMCA should bolster growth by 
giving more certainty to the business environment. Over-
all, a majority of contacts expect stronger revenues this 
year. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose broadly, with demand exceeding ex-
pectations in some areas thanks to healthy job growth 
and low mortgage rates. Builders’ margins mostly held 
steady, as builders were able to push through price 
increases to cover increases in construction costs. De-
velopment in previously less desirable locations has 
accelerated as builders focus on expanding offerings at 
more affordable price points. Outlooks were favorable, 
although a few contacts noted concern about the impact 
of the 2020 elections on home buying activity.  
Apartment demand remained healthy, with occupancy 
flat to up year over year and rent growth holding above 
long-term averages across most major Texas metros. 
Activity in the office market was mixed in Houston, while 
San Antonio and Dallas-Fort Worth saw steady demand. 
Industrial demand generally remained strong, particularly 
in DFW. New development of retail space remained 
modest and was driven by grocery-anchored shopping 
centers. Investor interest remained high for commercial 
properties in Texas’ major markets.  
Financial Services 
Growth in loan demand increased over the reporting 
period. Loan volume growth was broad based across all 
lending categories, with real estate lending (both com-
mercial and residential) continuing to lead growth. Bank-
ers reported that loan pricing continued to decline, and 
the vast majority noted no change in credit standards 
and terms. Business activity improved since the last 
reporting period, and expectations for activity six months 
from now have improved slightly. 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District ticked up slightly 
over the reporting period, after several months of de-
clines. Contacts indicated that the rig count was likely 
near a soft bottom, although further declines are possi-
ble. The industry remained distressed as access to 
capital was limited, especially for small firms. Bankrupt-
cies were likely to rise, according to contacts. However, 
U.S. crude oil production is still projected to grow in 
2020. 
Agriculture 
More than half of Texas remained abnormally dry or in 
drought, although drought severity eased somewhat over 
the reporting period. Agricultural producers expressed 
concern over dry conditions damping crop production 
next year. This is especially pertinent given relatively low 
crop prices, as above-average production is needed in 
order for farmers to achieve profitability. Cotton exports 
were quite strong, and lower U.S. and world supplies 
boosted price outlooks. The signing of the USMCA alle-
viated some uncertainty among agricultural producers, 
and progress on U.S. and China trade disputes added 
optimism. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded at a modest pace during the reporting period of mid-November 
through December. The labor market remained tight, employment growth picked up modestly, and wages rose further. 
Reports on prices suggested inflation was up slightly on balance. Sales of retail goods increased moderately, and activi-
ty in consumer and business services was up modestly. The pace of commerce in the manufacturing sector was stable, 
and activity in the agriculture sector was mixed. While the residential real estate market expanded strongly, commercial 
real estate activity softened somewhat. Lending grew steadily. 
 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market remained tight, and employment 
growth was up modestly on balance. Demand for work-
ers remained elevated, though shortages of qualified 
candidates somewhat stymied hiring growth. Businesses 
in several sectors including health care, finance, and 
information technology continued to experience difficul-
ties in hiring high-skilled workers. Similarly, firms in retail, 
agriculture, and construction reported increased job 
vacancies across skill levels. A few contacts character-
ized worker shortages as a significant deterrent to busi-
ness expansion. Worker turnover remained high, with 
firms reporting increased investment in job training and 
automation as ways to enhance productivity. In the 
Pacific Northwest, business services and manufacturing 
firms instituted shorter interview processes to counteract 
the increased competition for workers. Conversely, some 
firms in the consulting, counseling, and utilities sectors 
reported stable hiring levels. Community bankers in 
Oregon and Southern California saw a tick up in hiring 
after some large banks in these regions laid off some of 
their high-skilled payroll. 
Wages rose further across the District as companies 
tried to attract and retain qualified workers. Wages 
picked up across skill levels as labor markets remained 
highly competitive. In the Mountain West, a contact in 
the banking sector noted paying more than double the 
prevailing market rate for some positions. Entry-level 
wages also rose in many sectors including finance, 
tourism, and retail despite reports of decreasing labor 
quality. A few employers in Seattle and Southern Califor-
nia highlighted regulatory increases in minimum wages 
as an additional source of upward wage pressures. A 
business services provider in the Pacific Northwest and 
a hotelier in California each raised concerns about wage 
compression in the face of increasing entry-level and 
minimum wages. Employers across the District also 
observed that benefit packages expanded, further in-
creasing total labor costs.        
Prices  
Reports on prices suggested that inflation was up slightly 
on balance. Many businesses such as professional 
service providers and financiers reported increased 
prices due to a pickup in labor costs. Fees for transporta-
tion and logistics services continued to increase. Firms in 
the technology and retail sectors highlighted that brisk 
competition limited their ability to pass through wage 
increases to final prices. Prices for telecommunications 
services, health care, and utilities remained mostly un-
changed. Some building materials producers reported 
lower prices over the reporting period, but others noted 
being able to charge higher prices following a pickup in 
construction activity. Contacts in metals manufacturing 
reported price declines.  
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods increased moderately. Most reports 
indicated that consumer demand was robust over the 
The Beige Book ■ January 2020 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
holiday season, with online sales growing faster than 
brick-and-mortar sales. Retailers attributed strong sales 
this season to consumers’ high disposable income, 
adequate product inventory levels, and improved in-store 
services and discounts. Luxury retailers reported a brisk 
rise in sales, as did those in other specialized markets 
such as home improvement products and pet pharma-
ceuticals. A few businesses that depend primarily on 
brick-and-mortar sales noted a shorter holiday shopping 
season and less foot traffic relative to previous years. 
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
was modestly stronger. Demand for health services and 
insurance remained robust across the District, the latter 
especially boosted by more comprehensive benefit pack-
ages in the face of tight competition for workers. Restau-
rants and food service providers reported solid sales 
over the holidays, though a major quick service restau-
rant in the Pacific Northwest witnessed a slight dip in 
sales over the reporting period. Holiday activity in the 
tourism sector was mixed, with bookings for leisure 
cruises and airline travel rising noticeably, while year-
end occupancy rates at Southern California hotels were 
down from earlier in the year. 
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector were stable on 
net. Production in the metals recycling industry in-
creased over the reporting period, though weak sales 
abroad were still a drag. A more active housing market 
and less competition from foreign producers stabilized 
demand for domestic wood products. Contacts reported 
that productivity increased and capacity utilization was 
above historical averages. Metal manufacturers in the 
Pacific Northwest reported healthy domestic demand 
and less competition from abroad, but activity was down 
somewhat on net. Activity in the electronics sector de-
clined near year-end due to weakness in new orders.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector was mixed. Reports from 
contacts in the Central Valley of California indicated 
most crop yields performed well despite reported water 
shortages. Domestic agricultural product sales remained 
at healthy levels, while sales abroad continued to suffer 
from issues related to trade disputes and slowing foreign 
economies. For example, sales of lumber increased 
domestically following a rebound in the housing market, 
but lower selling prices squeezed profits from export 
markets. One report also mentioned slower activity in the 
market for grapes. Activity in the livestock sector de-
creased somewhat, with demand for cattle and swine 
products ticking down a bit. In the energy sector, a con-
tact reported expectations for increased infrastructure 
investment but also mentioned continued excess gener-
ating capacity. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity expanded strongly. Re-
ports from across the District noted that buyer demand 
remained robust amid low inventories for both single-
family and multi-family housing. Contacts attributed the 
brisker demand to the low interest rate environment, 
despite a recent tick up in mortgage rates in some areas. 
Construction activity was up but somewhat restrained by 
labor shortages. Some suppliers noticed elevated costs 
for building materials due to high demand, but a few 
others noted that materials’ availability had improved. 
Contacts highlighted that home prices grew further, 
noting that affordability concerns have led some buyers 
to look for homes outside main urban areas. A financier 
from Southern California mentioned slower demand for 
high-end properties, noting that their development was 
constrained by tighter financing options and longer pro-
cessing times. A multi-family housing provider in Nevada 
added that tenant demand for add-ons such as conci-
erge and parcel services had also increased notably, 
even as rents increased.  
Activity in commercial real estate markets softened 
somewhat. Demand for retail and office space in Califor-
nia weakened, with some reports noting little new con-
struction. Commercial permitting also decreased in the 
Central Valley of California over the reporting period, 
though it remained stable in the Pacific Northwest. In 
contrast, demand for industrial spaces, like warehouses 
and distribution centers, remained elevated. Contacts 
noted that very low vacancy rates and increased leasing 
costs have spurred construction of new industrial spaces 
across the District. In the Pacific Northwest, public infra-
structure construction also increased.    
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew steadily. Most reports noted a 
further pickup in demand for credit, especially mortgage 
and personal credit. The commercial lending sector was 
relatively less active, with most loans focusing on refi-
nancing into lower interest rate contracts as opposed to 
new investment or construction. In general, capital levels 
and asset quality remained high, though lower interest 
rates put some pressure on banks’ net interest margins 
and profitability. Competition for loans continued to be 
brisk, while that for deposits was comparatively mild. A 
few banks reported tighter underwriting standards for 
new loans. A financial technology company that lends 
primarily to small businesses saw better than expected 
activity and low default rates. ■ 


