The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
December 2, 2020 
November 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
based on information collected on or before November 20, 2020. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Most Federal Reserve Districts have characterized economic expansion as modest or moderate since the prior Beige 
Book period. However, four Districts described little or no growth, and five narratives noted that activity remained below 
pre-pandemic levels for at least some sectors. Moreover, Philadelphia and three of the four Midwestern Districts    
observed that activity began to slow in early November as COVID-19 cases surged. Reports tended to indicate higher-
than-average growth of manufacturing, distribution and logistics, homebuilding, and existing home sales, although not 
without disruptions. Banking contacts in numerous Districts reported some deterioration of loan portfolios, particularly 
for commercial lending into the retail and leisure and hospitality sectors. An increase in delinquencies in 2021 is more 
widely anticipated. Most Districts reported that firms’ outlooks remained positive; however, optimism has waned – many 
contacts cited concerns over the recent pandemic wave, mandated restrictions (recent and prospective), and the   
looming expiration dates for unemployment benefits and for moratoriums on evictions and foreclosures. 
Employment and Wages 
Nearly all Districts reported that employment rose, but for most, the pace was slow, at best, and the recovery remained 
incomplete. Firms that were hiring continued to report difficulties in attracting and retaining workers. Many contacts 
noted that the sharp rise in COVID-19 cases had precipitated more school and plant closings and renewed fears of 
infection, which have further aggravated labor supply problems, including absenteeism and attrition. Providing for child-
care and virtual schooling needs was widely cited as a significant and growing issue for the workforce, especially for 
women – prompting some firms to extend greater accommodations for flexible work schedules. In several Districts, 
firms feared that employment levels would fall over the winter before recovering further. Despite hiring difficulties, firms 
in most Districts reported that wages grew at a slight or modest pace overall. However, many noted greater pressure to 
raise rates for low-skilled workers, especially in outlying areas. Staffing firms described greater placement success with 
competitive rates, and one firm instituted a minimum wage rate for its industrial clients. 
Prices 
In most Districts, firms reported modest to moderate increases of input prices, while the selling prices of final goods 
rose at a slight to modest pace. Contacts noted that COVID-19 cases have caused ongoing disruptions and delays 
among short-staffed producers and shippers – raising transportation costs, which are then passed through to buyers. 
Boston 
Manufacturers reported increased revenues from a year 
ago, including some strong gains. Retailers and staffing 
firms continued recovering toward pre-pandemic levels, 
while the hospitality and tourism sectors remained hard-
hit. Uncertainty about the course of the pandemic, vac-
cines, and possible relief measures added caution to 
positive outlooks. 
 
New York 
The regional economy has been flat, and the labor mar-
ket has remained weak. Manufacturing growth slowed, 
consumer spending and tourism were little changed, and 
a number of service industries saw declines in activity. 
Commercial real estate softened further, but most resi-
dential sales markets continued to show strength.    
Wages and other business input costs picked up mod-
estly, while selling prices were little changed. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Business activity held steady during the current Beige 
Book period and remained below levels attained prior to 
the onset of COVID-19. However, sharply rising COVID-
19 cases triggered a downward trend in early November 
and heightened concerns over anticipated layoffs, fore-
closures, evictions, and bankruptcies. Meanwhile, mod-
est job growth, slight wage growth, and modest inflation 
continued. 
Cleveland 
Economic activity increased moderately, and staff levels 
increased slightly. Firms connected to IT, housing, and 
consumer durables fared better than those connected to 
travel, energy, and hospitality. Supply chain constraints 
boosted transportation costs and prices for certain con-
struction and manufacturing inputs. Contacts expected a 
modest improvement in activity, but hiring plans were 
restrained because of the pandemic’s uncertain path. 
Richmond 
The regional economy grew moderately in recent weeks. 
Employment rose and demand for some professional 
business occupations was strong. Wage and price 
growth were modest. The housing market remained 
robust, and commercial real estate leasing improved 
somewhat. Port and trucking volumes reached robust 
levels and manufacturing activity picked up. 
Atlanta 
District economic activity modestly expanded. Labor 
markets continued to improve. Contacts noted some 
nonlabor costs rose. Retail activity and auto sales were 
mixed. Activity in tourism and hospitality picked up slight-
ly. Residential real estate demand was strong and home 
prices rose. Commercial real estate conditions remained 
challenged. Manufacturing activity increased. Conditions 
at financial institutions stabilized. 
Chicago 
Economic activity increased moderately but remained 
below its pre-pandemic level. Employment, consumer 
spending, and manufacturing increased moderately; 
business spending increased modestly; and construction 
and real estate was flat. Wages rose slightly, as did 
prices. Financial conditions improved modestly. Strong 
harvests, government support, and higher prices boost-
ed expectations for farm income. 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Reports from District contacts suggest economic activity 
has continued to increase slightly since our previous 
report; however, conditions deteriorated toward the end 
of the reporting period. The overall outlook for business 
conditions over the next 12 months has improved but 
remains slightly pessimistic. 
Minneapolis 
District economic activity grew moderately. Employment 
rose modestly, but obstacles such as child care availabil-
ity and virtual schooling for households with children 
impacted labor participation, particularly among women. 
Consumer spending grew slightly, with softening de-
mand in some segments due to rising COVID-19 infec-
tions. Manufacturers generally saw brisk growth. Agricul-
tural conditions improved slightly. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity continued to expand slightly. After ris-
ing in October, consumer spending fell slightly in Novem-
ber but was expected to bounce back in the coming 
months. Contacts in the manufacturing, residential real 
estate, wholesale trade, transportation, and professional 
and high-tech services sectors all reported increased 
levels of activity. In addition, the energy sector held 
steady, and the agriculture sector improved moderately. 
Dallas 
Economic activity expanded modestly. Growth moderat-
ed in the manufacturing, retail, and services sectors. The 
housing market continued to outperform expectations, 
but office leasing remained weak. Energy activity re-
mained depressed though it showed further signs of 
improvement. Outlooks were positive, though highly 
uncertain due to looming concerns surrounding political 
uncertainty and the unknown course of the pandemic. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the District expanded modestly. 
Employment levels increased slightly, while price infla-
tion showed little change. Sales of retail goods rose 
appreciably, but conditions in the services sector were 
unchanged. Manufacturing expanded moderately, and 
the agriculture sector improved slightly. Residential real 
estate activity continued to grow, while commercial 
markets changed little. Lending activity increased mildly. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to expand in the First District in October and early November. Most manufacturers cited 
increases in revenues in recent weeks compared with a year earlier. Tourism and hospitality remained in the doldrums, 
while brick and mortar retailers saw gains from earlier in the year. Staffing firms’ revenues were down from a year ago, 
but they too cited quarter-over-quarter improvements. Real estate markets for industrial and lab space continued strong 
even as the office and retail real estate markets remained weak. Residential real estate markets across the region con-
tinued to experience increases in both sales and prices. Reports on the labor market were mixed. Most responding firms 
cited cautiously optimistic outlooks, with continued uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor market conditions varied by sector. Many hotel 
workers across the region remained furloughed, particu-
larly staff that worked larger functions. Most manufactur-
ing respondents said they were hiring; some reported 
difficulty finding workers but others did not. A supplier to 
commercial aviation announced major layoffs over the 
summer and has not had any reason to revise those 
plans either up or down since then. Staffing companies, 
while noting increased business, reported that the supply 
of labor continued to be a challenge. They cited a num-
ber of reasons for a shortage of workers: limited or lack 
of access to daycare and school, worries about contract-
ing COVID-19, mandatory 14-day quarantines, and 
potential further shutdowns. Staffing firms’ bill and pay 
rates have gone up considerably since the pandemic hit, 
but some companies said the rates had begun reversing 
toward their pre-pandemic levels.  
Prices  
Contacts cited limited concerns about prices. Average 
nightly hotel prices in Boston dropped 45 percent com-
pared to 2019 reflecting extremely low occupancy. Man-
ufacturers said pricing pressures were generally muted. 
Nonetheless, a chemical maker said prices of some bulk 
chemicals had spiked due to demand for PPE and the 
recovery in China. Several manufacturers registered cost 
concerns regarding the availability of transportation both 
locally and around the world. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts noted improvements in brick and mortar 
store sales compared to the first half of 2020, though 
tourism and hospitality respondents continued to report 
major disruptions related to COVID-19. After limited in-
person shopping in the second quarter, one retailer’s 
same-store sales were off just 5 percent—exceeding 
expectations—across August, September, and October 
compared to the same period in 2019, with home décor 
and furnishings doing best. Another retail contact report-
ed sales improved more than anticipated from the spring, 
but were down by mid-single digits from a year ago. 
Restaurants across Massachusetts benefited from a dry 
summer and start of fall, but as temperatures declined, 
outdoor dining and average sales dropped. At the same 
time, COVID-19 cases increased and new restrictions 
were imposed, both of which contacts suspected raised 
concerns with indoor dining. Many restaurants that used 
tented spaces to increase social-distanced table capacity 
this fall reported that heating constraints will shut down 
those spaces as winter approaches. Restaurants in 
Boston continued to fare the worst in the state, on aver-
age, and some will close for the winter, as operating at 
reduced capacity would lead to greater losses.  
Travel industry contacts reported that hotel stays were 
still significantly impacted by the pandemic; hotel occu-
pancy in Boston was under 30 percent as compared with 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

A-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston  
a 2019 average over 80 percent. Conventions scheduled 
in Boston through July 2021 have been postponed.  
Manufacturing and Related Services 
All but one of 11 contacted manufacturers reported 
increased sales versus a year earlier. The lone excep-
tion has large exposure to commercial aviation and 
autos, with commercial aviation down 40 percent to 50 
percent and autos down 10 percent to 15 percent. By 
contrast, some contacts reported strong gains, including 
a manufacturer of testing equipment who said sales 
were up 35 percent and a semiconductor equipment 
supplier with a 45 percent increase. A manufacturer of 
ventilators cited $400 million in orders as compared to 
$20 million in a normal year. A supplier of products to 
veterinarians said that demand was up partly because 
the number of pet owners has increased during the 
pandemic. 
Capital expenditures were generally up but several con-
tacts reported delays in delivery of capital goods. No one 
reported any issues with financing. Most contacts had 
not made major capital investments in response to high 
demand because they viewed it as temporary. 
Manufacturers generally reported positive outlooks, 
albeit with some caution because of uncertainty about 
both the path of the pandemic and the timing of vac-
cines.  
Staffing Services 
New England staffing firms reported positive growth in 
Q3 regardless of their industry exposure. Quarter-over-
quarter growth rates ranged from 10 percent to 15 per-
cent for firms that shared numbers. By early Q4, a few 
companies enjoyed levels of business activity similar to 
their pre-COVID ones. All contacts remarked that busi-
ness volume was still down compared to a year ago, 
citing numbers from -8 percent to -40 percent. All report-
ed that business has steadily regained momentum since 
July, with the demand for labor strong. One contact had 
shifted to placing essential workers due to higher de-
mand. In general, staffing firms were more optimistic 
now than they were in August. They expect modest 
slowdowns next quarter but quick recovery in the follow-
ing quarters of 2021.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Conditions in First District leasing markets have not 
changed appreciably since the last report. Industrial and 
lab space continued to do well, while retail and office 
space continued to suffer. Much industrial activity was 
related to e-commerce and last-mile fulfillment. Con-
struction activity in the industrial market was somewhat 
restrained by increased construction costs. In the life-
science sector, one contact reported that around 5 mil-
lion square feet of lab space is underway to be delivered 
by the end of 2025 in greater Boston, with about 40 
percent of it pre-leased.  
With very little leasing activity in the office sector, tenants 
nearing the end of their leases were renewing only for 
the short term. Some respondents reported an increase 
in available office sublease space, indicating more office-
market problems to come. Retail properties continued 
struggling, with grocery and big-box stores the only 
successes. Contacts estimated daytime office occupan-
cy rates at around 20 percent—bad news for the shops 
and restaurants that relied on office workers’ business. 
Regarding the outlook, contacts expressed cautious 
optimism, with positive vaccine news and the election 
behind them. Many expected Q1 2021 to be tough, with 
the pandemic picking up again and uncertainty about 
future stimulus measures, but they were hopeful about 
the second half of 2021.  
Residential Real Estate 
The First District saw high sales numbers in September 
or October, as pent-up demand from the delayed spring 
market and eagerness to take advantage of historically 
low mortgage rates overpowered the usual fall slow-
down. (Connecticut data were unavailable. Boston and 
Maine reported changes from October 2019 to October 
2020; all other areas reported changes through Septem-
ber 2020.) 
The number of closed sales increased in all reporting 
areas from a year ago, with double-digit increases for all 
markets except Boston condos. Notwithstanding these 
unusually high sales numbers, severe inventory shortag-
es continued; the inventory of homes for sale dropped by 
double-digit percentages from a year ago in all reporting 
markets except Boston condos. The lack of inventory 
and high buyer demand continued to put upward pres-
sure on prices and, once again, the median sale price 
rose in all markets, with double-digit increases for single 
family homes. Contacts expected this “buying frenzy” to 
continue through the winter months. The Massachusetts 
contact again mentioned movement from urban areas to 
suburban and rural areas, and the Maine contact noted a 
substantial influx of out-of-state buyers.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District economy was flat in the latest reporting period. The labor market has remained 
weak, with employment in most industry sectors essentially unchanged. Input prices continued to rise moderately, while 
selling prices were little changed. Consumer spending has been little changed at subdued levels, while tourism has 
remained depressed. Housing markets have continued to strengthen, except in New York City, while markets for office 
and retail space have continued to soften. Finally, banks reported little change in loan demand, tighter credit standards, 
and an upturn in delinquency rates. Overall, business contacts have become less optimistic about the near-term out-
look, with many contacts mentioning the recent pandemic wave, increased restrictions, and political uncertainty as major 
challenges. 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained weak, with employment 
levels little changed in recent weeks.  A major New York 
City employment agency reported that hiring has re-
mained moribund and anticipated a rough patch through 
the winter but expressed hope for a pickup later in 2021. 
An upstate agency, on the other hand, indicated scat-
tered signs of a pickup in hiring, especially for lower-
wage workers, and noted particular difficulty in recruiting 
customer-service representatives. Despite the weak 
labor market, a number of business contacts have strug-
gled to hire and retain skilled workers. 
Businesses in many service industries—leisure & hospi-
tality, education & health, wholesale trade, and infor-
mation—reported flat to declining employment. However, 
manufacturers and retailers, on balance, reported mod-
est increases in staff. Business contacts in most sectors 
said they plan to leave staffing levels at or near current 
levels in the months ahead, with the notable exception of 
construction, where considerably more businesses plan 
to reduce than expand employment.   
Wages have picked up modestly, according to business 
contacts across a wide spectrum of industries. Moreover, 
an upstate New York employment agency noted a partic-
ular upward trend in wages at the lower end of the pay 
scale. Looking ahead, businesses generally expect 
wages to accelerate somewhat—particularly in the trade 
& transportation and education & health sectors.  
Prices  
Business contacts have reported somewhat more up-
ward pressure on input prices in recent weeks. Busi-
nesses in manufacturing, distribution, education & 
health, and leisure & hospitality have generally noted 
more widespread escalation than those in other sectors.  
Construction contacts, on the other hand, reported 
somewhat less pronounced cost pressures than previ-
ously. Some business contacts have noted a pro-
nounced acceleration in health coverage costs for 2021. 
Regarding selling prices, retailers, distributors, and man-
ufacturers reported some increases, but businesses in 
other sectors indicated that selling prices remained 
steady. Looking ahead, there has been a further modest 
increase in the proportion of businesses planning to 
raise their selling prices in the next few months—most 
notably in the retail and manufacturing sectors.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending has been mostly flat since the last 
report.  Retailers reported that sales have been steady to 
somewhat lower in recent weeks, with business remain-
ing well below pre-pandemic levels.  Stores in upstate 
New York continued to outperform those in other areas.  
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
New vehicle sales were flat to down slightly, according to 
dealers in upstate New York, with the weakness attribut-
ed to a combination of low inventories, reduced dealer 
incentives, and some pullback in demand. Sales of used 
vehicles have been steady, also hampered by lean in-
ventories.  Consumer confidence among residents of the 
Middle Atlantic region (NY, NJ, PA) retreated in October 
and remains moderately below pre-pandemic levels.   
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturing growth has slowed to a subdued pace in 
the latest reporting period.  In contrast, wholesale trade 
firms continued to report moderate growth, and busi-
nesses engaged in transportation & warehousing report-
ed some pickup in activity. 
Looking ahead, manufacturers have remained fairly 
optimistic about the outlook, while wholesalers’ optimism 
has waned, and transportation & warehousing contacts 
have continued to be broadly pessimistic.   
Services 
Service industry contacts generally reported that busi-
ness activity has weakened noticeably in the latest re-
porting period. Contacts in the professional & business 
services and leisure & hospitality sectors reported wide-
spread declines in activity, while those in the information 
and education & health sectors indicated more moderate 
declines.  Looking ahead, professional & business ser-
vice firms expressed mild optimism about prospects for 
the months ahead, whereas leisure & hospitality firms 
expressed increased concern that conditions would 
deteriorate.       
Tourism, which had picked up somewhat in the previous 
reporting period, has more recently shown signs of 
weakening.  A number of contacts attribute this to the 
recent wave of the pandemic across the nation and 
much of the world, as well as the onset of cold weather, 
which limits outdoor activities. An authority on New York 
City’s tourism sector noted that most recent visitations 
have been short haul trips.  Hotel occupancy rates have 
been noticeably higher on weekends than weekdays but 
are still well below 50 percent, and room rates are down 
sharply. Many city hotels are picking up some of the 
slack with alternative uses, such as providing shelter for 
the homeless. Advance bookings for the holiday season 
suggest only a modest uptick. While tourism is expected 
to rebound noticeably in 2021, it is projected to remain 
25-30 percent below pre-pandemic levels, as the interna-
tional and business segments are expected to lag. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets have continued to strengthen across 
much of the District.  In both upstate New York and the 
areas around New York City, sales activity has been 
brisk, home prices have risen strongly, and the inventory 
of unsold homes has declined further. In New York City, 
conditions have been more mixed.  Rental markets have 
weakened further: with increased landlord concessions, 
effective rents are reported to be down 15 percent from a 
year ago in both Manhattan and nearby Queens and 
down 5 percent in Brooklyn, as vacancy rates have 
climbed. The co-op and condo sales market has been 
more stable, with prices declining moderately in Manhat-
tan but holding mostly steady in Brooklyn.   
Commercial real estate markets have weakened further. 
Office availability and vacancy rates have continued to 
rise across the District, while asking rents declined in 
New York City but were steady to higher across the rest 
of the District. Retail vacancies have continued to in-
crease across the District.  Asking rents for retail space 
have fallen sharply in New York City but have been flat 
to down modestly in other areas.    
New construction activity has remained sluggish and well 
below year-earlier levels for both residential and com-
mercial structures.  Contacts in the construction industry 
reported weakening activity and have grown increasingly 
pessimistic about the near-term outlook.  One contact 
noted clogged supply chains as a major problem and 
attributed this partly to reduced availability of credit. 
Banking and Finance 
Contacts in the finance sector generally continued to 
report steady to declining business activity but have 
grown less pessimistic about the near-term outlook.  
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported little 
change in overall loan demand, with increased demand 
for residential mortgages but decreased demand for 
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans. Refinancing activ-
ity increased.  Bankers reported tightened credit stand-
ards across all categories.  Spreads narrowed on all loan 
categories except C&I, where spreads were unchanged. 
Finally, bankers reported higher delinquency rates 
across all loan segments except commercial mortgages 
where delinquency rates held steady. Bankers reported 
no change in the degree of leniency on delinquent ac-
counts across all categories. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional-economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, Third District business activity held steady for most of the current Beige Book period and remained below 
levels observed prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in most sectors. Net employment continued to grow mod-
estly, wages continued to grow slightly, and price increases remained modest. However, numerous contacts noted that 
the sharp rise in COVID-19 cases had disrupted economic activity, and a downward trend emerged as November be-
gan. The cases heightened concerns that the winter months would prove difficult, if not impossible, to survive for some 
firms. Bankruptcies have already begun within the retail, restaurant, and hospitality sectors. Contacts are concerned that 
when unemployment benefits and moratoriums on evictions and foreclosures expire, an avalanche of bankruptcies will 
emerge among other small and medium-sized businesses, as well as households. Positive expectations for growth over 
the next six months have narrowed among firms. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to increase modestly overall. The 
share of manufacturers reporting employment increases 
held steady at one-third, while the share reporting de-
clines fell. Among nonmanufacturing firms, the share 
reporting increases has risen since the prior period, 
while the share reporting decreases held steady. On 
balance, average hours worked rose across all firms.  
Activity at staffing firms remained below pre-pandemic 
levels, with most firms noting more openings than candi-
dates. Firms have more success at placements for those 
clients willing to pay competitive wages. Even in outlying 
areas of the District, this often means that firms seeking 
workers for low-skilled jobs must compete with billboard 
advertisements by warehouses for positions that start at 
$15 an hour and higher. Rising COVID-19 cases and 
sporadic school closings continue to deter workers, 
especially women, from reentering the labor market.  
Wages continued to grow slightly. In mid-November, the 
percentage of nonmanufacturing firms reporting higher 
wage and benefit costs per employee remained some-
what higher than the percentage reporting lower costs. 
However, two-thirds of the firms reported no change.  
Prices  
Prices continued to rise modestly overall. Nearly 40 
percent of the manufacturers reported that prices rose 
for factor inputs (and none reported a decline), but only 
about 25 percent received higher prices for their own 
products. In turn, about 25 percent of the nonmanufac-
turers reported that prices rose for their inputs, but only 
about 10 percent received higher prices from consumers 
for their own goods and services (and 6 percent reported 
declines). Generally, well over half of all firms noted no 
change in prices.  
Various contacts noted that supply disruptions, shortag-
es, and price spikes were easing. However, as      
COVID-19 cases surged, more businesses were coping 
with sporadic shutdowns and labor shortages, and many 
feared worse conditions in the winter months ahead.  
Looking ahead one year, manufacturers now anticipate 
receiving prices for their own goods and services that 
are modestly higher than they expected one quarter 
earlier. However, nonmanufacturing firms have raised 
their expectations significantly. Overall, firms also report-
ed slightly higher expectations for annual consumer 
inflation.  
Manufacturing 
On average, manufacturing activity continued to grow 
slightly over the prior period; however, the trend softened 
in early November. The diffusion indexes for shipments 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
and for new orders from our mid-month surveys in Octo-
ber and November remained positive – suggesting some 
growth. However, the indexes rose from September to 
October, then fell in November.  
Manufacturing firms responding to a question drawn 
from our COVID-19 survey reported that sales and new 
orders were about 8 percent below what had been antici-
pated pre-pandemic – the same as was reported at the 
end of September.  
One contact with a diverse and global footprint noted 
that U.S. manufacturing softened at the beginning of 
November, as had manufacturing in Europe after  
COVID-19 cases began rising. In contrast, cases are few 
in China, and activity is holding steady. Although China’s 
economy would be expected to slow as global demand 
wanes, the contact noted that some production has 
shifted back to Chinese facilities – free of virus-induced 
disruptions.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail sales appeared to edge lower beginning 
in late October. Contacts cited rising COVID-19 cases 
and falling temperatures as contributing factors. Rising 
caseloads worried consumers and disrupted purveyors 
with staff shortages and sporadic closures. Sales held 
steady for some firms but still disappointed, since holiday 
shopping (and eating out) would typically have begun to 
boost brick-and-mortar sales.  
Auto dealers continued to report strong consumer de-
mand for new and used autos; however, the growth rate 
in new car sales remained modest on average. Dealers 
noted that inventory problems had mostly cleared and 
that margins were greater, as labor expense was lower 
and terms with manufacturers were more favorable.  
Contacts noted that leisure travel held up later into the 
fall, but business travel and group travel picked up less 
than usual. Shore destinations reported better-than-
normal activity well into October. However, overall tour-
ism remained at almost half of prior-year levels and 
appeared to decline slightly at the end of October. A 
hotel contact expects a tough winter for the industry and 
has already observed more “jingle mail” – when the 
operator sends the keys to the lender.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, nonmanufacturing activity has fallen slightly 
since the prior period. In responding to a question from 
our COVID-19 survey at the end of September, nonman-
ufacturers had reported that sales and new orders were 
about 16 percent below what had been anticipated pre-
pandemic. In our mid-month surveys for October and 
November, firms reported demand was nearer to 19 
percent below pre-pandemic expectations.  
The diffusion indexes for new orders and sales from our 
mid-month surveys also suggested slight declines. Both 
indexes have fallen into negative territory since mid-
September, indicating that declines were somewhat 
more widespread among firms and that the overall direc-
tion of change was no longer positive.  
Financial Services 
The volume of bank lending fell modestly during the 
period (not seasonally adjusted); in the same period in 
2019, by contrast, loan volumes grew modestly. Resi-
dential mortgages grew modestly but were offset by 
modest declines in home equity lines, auto loans, and 
other consumer loans. Commercial real estate lending 
was flat, and commercial and industrial loans fell sharply 
again as Paycheck Protection Program loans continued 
to roll off the books. Credit card volumes fell moderately; 
last year, they grew modestly over the same period.  
Banking contacts, as well as accountants and attorneys, 
continued to note little change in delinquencies or other 
credit problems, except in the retail, restaurant, and 
hospitality sectors. However, concerns remained that 
significant problems will arise as moratoriums on evic-
tions and foreclosures expire and unemployment bene-
fits end.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported moderate sales growth in which 
demand continues to outpace the availability of land and 
labor. Raising prices has helped builders to slow de-
mand and cover rising costs. Existing home sales have 
also grown moderately – relative to very low levels from 
the prior year. Inventory levels remain extremely low; 
however, the recent high demand for homes may be 
depressing inventory levels because new listings are 
snapped up so quickly.  
Philadelphia’s commercial construction activity held 
steady at about 13 percent below the level of activity 
anticipated before the pandemic. The existing pipeline of 
construction should keep activity steady through the first 
half of 2021. Commercial office leasing activity has fallen 
moderately in the suburbs and in central business dis-
tricts. Demand remained strong for warehousing con-
struction and leasing. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity increased moderately and at a similar pace to the previous reporting period. Activity increased at a 
brisk pace for professional services, freight haulers, and firms whose sales benefitted from low interest rates (such as 
homebuilders and durable goods producers). Firms in industries that were most impacted by the pandemic (such as 
hospitality, aerospace, and energy) saw little improvement in demand. Staff levels increased slightly as customer de-
mand improved. However, most firms were still below pre-pandemic staff levels. Although labor availability had im-
proved recently, many firms report ongoing difficulty finding workers. Idiosyncratic disruptions to production as well as 
shipping delays pushed up transportation rates and costs for certain construction and manufacturing inputs. Selling 
prices rose moderately as a result. Looking ahead, contacts expected modest improvement in customer demand, alt-
hough expectations have been tempered since the previous reporting period because of the uncertainty of the corona-
virus’s path. Consequently, outlooks for hiring in the year ahead were also restrained.  
Employment and Wages  
District labor markets continue to heal steadily. Staff 
levels increased slightly in response to the broader 
improvement in business activity. Most firms that had 
temporarily laid off workers have rehired most of those 
workers. That said, staff levels remain below pre-
pandemic levels for about two-thirds of our contacts. 
Also, despite high levels of unemployment, firms experi-
enced mixed results in recruiting workers. Firms general-
ly had no trouble finding workers for office-type jobs, but 
recruitment was still a challenge for many manufacturing, 
construction, retail, and transportation firms. Firms in 
these sectors indicated that, although labor availability 
has improved with the passage of time since supple-
mental unemployment benefits lapsed in July, their 
staffing challenges have persisted. 
Overall, wage pressures were modest because of the 
slack in the labor market. The freight and logistics sector 
was an exception. Many of these firms reported pay 
increases of 10 percent or more for drivers and hourly 
workers to attract workers and to stem high employee 
turnover. 
Regarding the outlook, hiring plans for the year ahead 
were generally modest. About a third of contacts ex-
pected they will still be below pre-pandemic staff levels 
12 months from now. Uncertainty about the path of the 
virus and associated public health measures topped the 
reasons firms are reticent to add staff. Moreover, a siza-
ble share of firms indicated they expected sales growth 
to be too low to justify stronger hiring. 
Prices  
Nonlabor costs rose moderately, on balance. However, 
cost increases were more prominent for builders, manu-
facturers, and retailers. Many firms in these sectors 
experienced delays in receiving inputs because either 
the producer or the shipper was short-staffed. This situa-
tion not only increased input costs and the cost of ship-
ping these materials, but it also increased lead times. 
Steel and lumber were widely cited as examples of com-
modities for which prices are well above pre-pandemic 
levels. 
Selling prices rose moderately, although increases were 
stronger for durable goods and freight than they were for 
professional services and nondurable goods. Very strong 
demand and tight capacity in the industry motivated 
almost all of our freight haulers to boost their rates for 
new contracts, and most received little pushback from 
customers. A number of manufacturers and builders 
were able to pass cost increases on to their customers if 
they were not held to a long-term contract. Auto dealers 
commented that low inventories of vehicles continue to 
The Beige Book Ŷ November 2020 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
push up prices for new and used cars. By contrast, a 
number of restaurants and hotels cut their prices to 
attract customers. Professional services firms broadly 
held their prices, as they have done for several reporting  
periods.  
Consumer Spending 
Reports suggest that consumer spending grew moder-
ately, albeit at a slower pace than in the last reporting 
period. Sales of goods were generally stronger than for 
services. Auto dealers commented that sales remained 
strong, thanks largely to low interest rates, and while 
some reported improved inventory levels, a number of 
contacts indicated that sales were still being limited by 
low inventories. Sales for general merchandisers and 
apparel retailers were slightly better recently, and they 
were expecting a favorable holiday shopping season. 
However, hoteliers and restauranteurs noted that the 
recent rise in COVID-19 cases weakened dine-in sales 
and business travel further from its previous low level, 
and customers were cancelling planned weddings and 
holiday events. Contacts expected business activity to 
remain broadly unchanged in the next few months, alt-
hough increases in COVID-19 infections and diminished 
assistance to households from federal programs were 
significant downside risks to the outlook for spending.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing orders increased modestly, although at a 
slower rate than in the previous period. Firms also re-
ported slightly better capacity utilization, and plans for 
capital investment were stable. By end-market, the wide 
variation in activity that was seen in recent periods per-
sisted. Firms that make consumer durables (such as 
autos) and goods related to homebuilding continue to 
experience strong demand. Also, the growth of online 
retailing boosted orders for producers of packaging and 
logistics equipment. Conversely, aerospace demand 
remained flat at low levels because of depressed air 
travel. Similarly, orders for oil and gas equipment re-
mained weak because of low levels of oil and gas drill-
ing. Looking forward, contacts expected demand to 
improve modestly. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Demand for homes remained strong, and contacts at-
tributed this primarily to low mortgage rates. Although a 
seasonal slowdown is normally experienced around this 
time of the year, homebuilders and real estate agents 
noted that sales have yet to slow. Looking to the next 
two months, contacts were concerned that demand may 
soften as COVID-19 cases increase. One homebuilder 
indicated that traffic on the firm’s website had declined, 
suggesting that new home sales may soon begin to 
soften. 
Nonresidential construction and real estate activity re-
mained relatively stable since our last report. Increases 
in COVID-19 infections and uncertainty about the elec-
tions led many firms to hold off on their investments. One 
general contractor stated that there have been fewer 
projects available for bidding and those that are available 
have been smaller in dollar value. He also noted that 
many projects have seen a significantly larger pool of 
bidders than usual.  
Financial Services 
Banking activity remained stable during the reporting 
period. Contacts noted that low interest rates continued 
to support demand for consumer loans, especially for 
mortgages and auto loans. However, demand for busi-
ness loans was reportedly flat. Core deposits grew for 
most contacts, and lenders indicated that delinquency 
rates for commercial and consumer loans were still low 
because of forbearance agreements and CARES Act-
related assistance. One banker noted that customers for 
whom forbearance agreements had ended were staying 
current with their payments. Looking ahead, bankers 
were optimistic that conditions will improve as the likeli-
hood of an effective COVID-19 vaccine increases.   
Professional and Business Services 
Demand for professional and business services strength-
ened further from its previous high level. IT firms, in 
particular, experienced robust demand for digitization 
projects and support for online retailing operations. One 
marketing firm noted an uptick in advertising activities. 
Contacts expressed optimism for the coming months and 
expected demand to remain strong. 
Freight 
Demand for freight services strongly increased, and 
firms expect the momentum to continue into the next 
several months. Logistics firms indicated that strong 
online retail sales growth was keeping fulfillment centers 
busy. Cargo volumes picked up as manufacturers and 
retailers built up their inventories. Also, import volumes 
were reported to have increased ahead of the holiday 
shopping season. Many firms in the industry indicated 
that high staff turnover and difficulty finding workers 
made it difficult for them to keep up with demand. Ŷ 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate rate in recent weeks. Although some sectors reported strong 
growth, most businesses reported demand or sales at levels below their pre-pandemic or year-ago levels. Manufactur-
ers experienced robust growth in shipments and new orders, and in some cases, demand exceeded capacity as produc-
ers were constrained by labor and supply chain factors. Ports and trucking companies saw strong growth in volumes, 
driven by high demand for furniture, consumer goods, and autos. Retailers reported little change in overall sales and low 
customer foot traffic, however there was strong growth in certain categories. Travel and tourism declined modestly as 
leisure travel softened. Restauranteurs voiced concerns about colder weather impacting outdoor dining in the coming 
months. Residential home sales picked up markedly and prices rose for both new and existing homes. Commercial real 
estate grew modestly. Office and retail vacancies remained elevated but rent payments held up. Despite moderate 
growth in mortgage demand, total loan volumes declined slightly, according to Fifth District financial institutions. On 
balance, the demand for nonfinancial services rose slightly in recent weeks. Employment continued to rise, but some 
firms looked to invest in technology or automation rather than hiring more workers. Overall, price growth was little 
changed as prices received by firms grew modestly.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment in the Fifth District rose moderately since 
the previous report. Despite recent increases, the over-
all level of employment remained below the pre-
pandemic level. Some professional and financial ser-
vices firms reported a recent uptick in hiring, particularly 
for accountants, lawyers, and IT professionals. An infra-
structure design and consulting firm was hiring engi-
neers due to strong demand for their services. Similarly, 
an advanced manufacturing firm reported strong growth 
in hiring for engineers, technicians, and administrative 
staff. Several businesses, however, were hesitant to hire 
and some looked to invest in technology or automation 
rather than increasing employment. Other firms reported 
difficulty finding workers to fill open positions. Wage 
growth remained modest, overall.    
Prices  
Price growth was little changed, on balance, in recent 
weeks. According to our most recent surveys, manufac-
turers and service sector firms reported modest growth 
in prices received, averaging well below two percent. 
Growth in prices paid for inputs remained moderate and 
generally outpaced growth in prices received. Firms in 
both goods producing and service providing sectors 
continued to state that additional cleaning measures and 
purchases of personal protection equipment contributed 
to the growth in input costs compared to last year.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported strong increases in shipments 
and new orders since our last report. Producers of furni-
ture, textiles, home goods, food, and shipping materials 
reported robust demand, often exceeding capacity. 
However, many manufacturers reported that production 
was constrained by unavailability of labor and supply 
chain disruptions resulting from tariffs, shutdowns, and 
shortages. Some manufacturers expressed concerns 
about recent increases in new COVID cases, leading to 
uncertainty about the extent that they would be able to 
operate in the near future.  
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports saw robust growth in shipping volumes 
in recent weeks. Contacts reported volumes were up 
over the year and neared record levels. Import levels 
continued to exceed export levels, but both registered 
strong growth and high volumes. Furniture, consumer 
goods, and auto imports were particularly strong, but 
machinery and beverage imports were weak. On the 
export side, machinery, meat, and grocery products were 
strong. Lumber and grain exports improved slightly but 
remained soft compared to year-ago levels.  
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Trucking companies reported high volumes and strong 
growth since our last report. High rates and fairly stable 
costs led to strong profits. Volumes of home improve-
ment goods and packaging materials were particularly 
high. Demand often exceeded supply, leading some 
companies to turn away business. Trucking companies 
continued capital investments but faced capacity con-
straints from lack of available drivers. Contacts noted 
that drivers from smaller companies that closed during 
the pandemic often left the industry or did not qualify to 
drive for larger companies with higher safety standards.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Fifth District retailers reported little change in recent 
weeks, and business remained below year-ago levels. 
Home goods and food retailers continued to see strong 
demand. Local retailers that also sell online reported 
solid online sales while in-store shopper traffic remained 
low. Auto sales were fairly stable, and dealers held out 
for higher prices because of low supply. Retailers 
worked to restock inventories to prepare for holiday 
sales, but some contacts reported that delays and short-
ages were limiting their ability to do so. 
Travel and tourism in the Fifth District saw a modest 
decline since our last report and was well below year-
ago and pre-pandemic levels. Hotel occupancy was low, 
as leisure travel softened and business travel remained 
very low. Restaurateurs expressed concerns about the 
feasibility of outdoor dining heading into the colder 
weather, as both restrictions and low demand limited 
indoor dining. Attractions, museums, and performing 
arts also saw weak demand. Many businesses felt that 
demand would not return until a vaccine becomes wide-
ly available, and many businesses faced renewed con-
straints on activity with the recent surge in virus cases. 
However, some mountain resorts reported solid to 
strong demand.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales in the Fifth District continued to be strong 
since our last report. Sales were robust across price 
ranges and locations; demand for moderately priced 
suburban homes was particularly strong. Prices were 
strong and rising for both new and existing homes, 
which contacts attributed to low inventories, high de-
mand, and low mortgage rates. Average days on the 
market decreased, as did the number of listings. Con-
struction costs were high as lumber prices remained 
significantly elevated. Realtors reported that buyers 
were increasingly looking for houses with more land, 
multiple home offices, pools, and personal gyms. 
 
Commercial real estate leasing grew modestly in recent 
weeks. Vacancy rates remained elevated for office and 
retail, but rent payments generally have held up. Office 
tenants asked for short-term renewals as they reevaluat-
ed space needs and increasingly looked to locate in 
smaller buildings, often in the suburbs, instead of renting 
space in urban high-rises. Some retail vacancies opened 
up as tenants went out of business, but realtors reported 
new interest in those spaces. Industrial space remained 
in high demand, driven largely by ecommerce. Multifami-
ly vacancy rates varied by location and were notably 
high in the District of Columbia. Rents were soft in retail 
and multifamily but high for industrial space. High con-
struction costs encouraged repurposing of old buildings 
by companies instead of building new sites.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, respondents reported that loan activity declined 
slightly for this period, despite moderate mortgage loan 
growth. On balance, contacts indicated conventional 
commercial lending remained unchanged with several 
banks indicating tightening credit standards, especially 
for hospitality, retail, and office loans. Deposit growth 
was moderate even with interest rates paid on deposits 
remaining low. Credit quality remained good, but a few 
respondents said they were carefully watching how 
some mid and lower tiered loans will perform in 2021. In 
addition, there was some concern regarding increased 
competition as banks search for loan volume to help 
offset lower yields.   
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, demand for nonfinancial services picked up 
slightly in recent weeks. Some firms reported moderate 
growth, particularly those engaged in construction relat-
ed services, information technology, legal, and financial 
services. Several other firms, however, reported flat to 
declining demand due to limited business-to-business 
spending. A marketing company, for example, said that 
businesses seemed to be conserving resources and 
marketing budgets were one of the first places that com-
panies look to cut. Health service providers continued to 
report strong demand. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/data_analysis 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, economic activity in the Sixth District expanded modestly from October through mid-November. Labor 
markets continued to recover as some firms added to headcounts where demand was strong. Some contacts noted 
rising nonlabor costs, especially related to construction and shipping. Retailers reported mixed activity. Auto dealers 
reported solid retail vehicle sales, offset by softness in fleet sales. Tourism and hospitality noted slow improvements in 
activity. Residential real estate remained strong, but challenges in commercial real estate markets continued. Manufac-
turing activity accelerated as new orders and production levels rose. Banking conditions stabilized, but net interest 
margins remained compressed. 
Employment and Wages  
On balance, contacts continued to report modest im-
provements in labor market conditions. Increases in 
headcounts were strongly tied to improvements in de-
mand. Some firms noted the ability to maintain or in-
crease productivity levels with fewer employees, while 
others reported onboarding new employees to provide 
relief to overworked staff. Seasonal hiring was notable 
among retailers, distributors, and delivery firms. Driver 
shortages intensified as capacity constraints due to 
social distancing measures at driver training locations 
slowed the number of new certified drivers. Business 
contacts indicated that companies in higher cost-of-living 
geographies were recruiting accounting, IT, and other 
professional staff to work remotely full-time, and are able 
to pay salaries that were higher than local market rates, 
but often lower than the salary paid in their geography. 
Those hiring for higher skilled positions noted an ability 
to find quality applicants. Overall, the supply of available 
lower-skilled workers remained limited. Childcare chal-
lenges continued to be noted and there were some 
reports of accelerations in retirements.  
There were fewer reports of wage and salary reductions 
since the previous report, and some firms began to 
restore pay cuts or plan to do so in 2021. Increases in 
wages were largely targeted to specific occupations and 
lower-skilled positions. 
Prices  
Over the reporting period, contacts continued to note 
some rising input costs, particularly for lumber and alu-
minum. Shipping costs rose as solid demand put in-
creased pressure on capacity; however, fuel costs re-
mained low. Firms continued to report little to no pricing 
power, but some anticipate having the ability to pass 
through increased costs in 2021. The Atlanta Fed’s 
Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-
over-year unit costs decreased significantly to 1.3 per-
cent in November, down from 1.6 percent in October. 
Year-ahead expectations increased to 1.9 percent from 
1.6 percent since the last reporting period. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Retailers reported mixed activity over the reporting peri-
od, though demand generally outperformed forecasts. 
Some retailers noted cutting store hours and reducing 
costs to preserve margins. The outlook for the holiday 
season remained uncertain. Although overall District 
auto sales declined from September to October, retail 
auto sales remained solid while fleet sales fell signifi-
cantly as compared with year-earlier levels.  
Travel and tourism contacts reported that the industry 
was slowly recapturing demand, as some contacts re-
ported a pickup in leisure travel. Business travel contin-
ued to struggle. Based on the current trajectory, a full 
recovery is not expected until 2023. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Although they moderated slightly from peak levels expe-
rienced over the summer, District home sales remained 
strong, with low interest rates continuing to be the prima-
ry driver of demand. Existing home inventory remained 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
tight and new home construction continued to lag de-
mand. Construction costs, especially lumber and labor, 
remained elevated. Consequently, home prices contin-
ued to rise, putting pressure on affordability. Rural areas 
in Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, urban markets in 
south and central Florida, and the southern portion of the 
Atlanta metro area were geographies that stood out in 
terms of the share of mortgages that remained in some 
stage of delinquency. 
Business contacts reported that the commercial real 
estate sector continued to encounter bifurcated condi-
tions associated with the effects of the pandemic. Hospi-
tality, which was especially hard hit earlier this year, saw 
modestly improving conditions come to an end, as occu-
pancies declined from the prior reporting period. Retail 
remained challenged; however, contacts reported limited 
improvement in rent collections. Low levels of tourism 
and travel have had a notable impact on activity across 
the hospitality and retail sectors. Recent asset valuations 
in public markets confirmed that values are deteriorating, 
which, along with tighter underwriting standards, may 
create impediments to new lending. 
Manufacturing 
Most manufacturing firms reported an increase in overall 
activity over the reporting period as new orders and 
production levels continued to climb. Production manag-
ers indicated that supplier delivery times were getting 
longer, and finished inventory levels remained slightly 
elevated. Expectations for future production levels de-
clined, with over one-third of contacts expecting higher 
levels of production over the next six months compared 
to one-half during the previous reporting period. 
Transportation 
District transportation contacts indicated that demand 
was largely consistent with the previous report. Total 
year-over-year rail traffic rose as robust intermodal 
freight volumes offset declines in agriculture products, 
petroleum and petroleum products, and aggregates and 
coal. Trucking companies noted solid demand; however, 
driver shortages continued to constrain capacity for 
some. At District ports, container traffic increased, while 
roll-on, roll-off cargo, breakbulk and bulk freight volumes 
remained below year-earlier levels. Several contacts 
reported strong warehouse expansion activity across the 
region. 
Banking and Finance  
Banking conditions stabilized, taking pressure off of 
earnings. Net interest margin compression continued but 
significant additions to provisions for loan losses were 
not required. Banks appeared to struggle to find suitable 
lending opportunities while deposit levels remained 
elevated. Outside of residential real estate and commer-
cial loans, loan balances across multiple portfolios were 
stagnant or edged downward. Instead of increasing 
loans, banks held higher balances in cash accounts or 
securities portfolios. 
Energy  
Hurricane Zeta made landfall within the District during 
the reporting period, causing temporary disruptions to oil 
and gas production in the Gulf of Mexico. Amid contin-
ued soft demand for crude oil, industry contacts reported 
consolidation among refiners and expect more in the 
coming months. Petrochemical manufacturers noted that 
reduction in crude oil refining has lowered the availability 
of residual products used for fuel, which ultimately has 
affected production supply chains, capabilities, and 
costs. While some energy contacts noted that petro-
chemical and chemical processing expansion projects 
were gradually restarting, others reported that many 
projects that were delayed will be on hold into 2021. 
Within the utilities sector, residential power demand was 
up compared with this time last year; however, commer-
cial and industrial segments, although recovering, were 
down overall. Contacts described that recovery of com-
mercial energy usage slowed in recent weeks since 
demand is sensitive to COVID-19 movements. Still, 
capital investment within the utilities sector remains 
solid, including increasing investment in renewable ener-
gy sources in the industry’s ongoing pursuit of increased 
decarbonization. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions were mixed. While drought-free 
conditions prevailed in most of the District, some produc-
ers reported crop damage caused by recent hurricanes. 
Contacts noted increases in some agriculture commodity 
prices attributed to changes in supply and demand, the 
USDA Food Box program, and improved trade with 
China. Some contacts also noted that increased federal 
assistance helped improve balance sheets. Cotton har-
vesting progressed, though below the five-year average 
pace, while soybean and peanut harvesting were near 
their five-year averages. The USDA reported year-over-
year prices paid to farmers in September were up for 
rice, soybeans, cattle, and eggs, but down for corn, 
cotton, broilers, and milk. On a month-over-month basis, 
prices increased for corn, cotton, soybeans, cattle, and 
eggs, but decreased for rice, broilers and milk. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased moderately in October and early November, though activity remained 
below its pre-pandemic level. Contacts expected further growth in the coming months, but nearly all expected full recov-
ery would not occur until at least the second half of 2021. Employment, consumer spending, and manufacturing in-
creased moderately; business spending increased modestly; and construction and real estate was flat. Wages rose 
slightly, as did prices. Financial conditions improved modestly. Strong harvests, government support, and higher prices 
boosted expectations for farm income. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased moderately overall during the 
reporting period. Several contacts made little or no 
change to their staffing levels and there were some 
reports of increased headcounts in response to sales 
growth. Numerous contacts reported increased absen-
teeism because of Covid-19 cases or exposures among 
their workers, but these firms were generally able to 
maintain their output levels. Many contacts noted difficul-
ty in finding workers, especially at the entry level. Sever-
al contacts reported using overtime to make up for ele-
vated absenteeism and unfilled positions. Wages across 
skill levels and benefits costs moved up slightly. 
Prices 
Prices increased slightly in October and early November, 
and contacts expected a moderate increase in prices 
over the next 12 months. Consumer prices ticked up, led 
by higher food and vehicle prices. Producer prices in-
creased slightly. Input costs were up modestly, driven by 
rising raw materials and shipping prices. Several con-
tacts said that a shift forward in holiday season deliveries 
had pushed up shipping rates. Energy prices moved 
down further, as oil and gas inventories remained elevat-
ed and demand was slow. 
 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending grew moderately over the reporting 
period. Nonauto retail sales increased modestly. De-
mand remained robust in the appliance, electronics, 
home accessories, home improvement, power sports, 
and recreational goods categories. Apparel rebounded 
somewhat, and sales at party supply stores were strong. 
Growth in e-commerce eased but continued to register 
sharp gains from a year earlier. Contacts expected holi-
day-related spending to increase slightly compared with 
last year. Light vehicle sales decreased modestly. Auto 
service department activity slowed, and contacts attribut-
ed the pullback to fewer people traveling to school and 
work. Leisure and hospitality spending increased but 
remained weak, as new and existing restrictions on 
business travel and conventions held back gains. Con-
tacts said that spending for elective health care proce-
dures fell. Social service organizations reported strong 
demand for mental health services and financial assis-
tance. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in October and 
early November. Retail inventories were generally com-
fortable, though stocks of certain vehicle models re-
mained well below normal levels. Most manufacturers 
also reported comfortable inventory levels, but a number 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
continued to experience minor supply chain problems, 
especially related to raw materials. Capital expenditures 
were little changed overall, though a number of contacts 
said they had resumed making investments after paus-
ing since the start of the pandemic. Several firms cited 
increased efficiencies as their justification for current 
expenditures. Contacts expected a moderate increase in 
capital spending over the next twelve months. Freight 
and shipping demand increased moderately, and con-
tacts noted that capacity constraints had led to sizeable 
price increases. Commercial and industrial energy con-
sumption increased slightly. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was unchanged on 
balance over the reporting period. Residential construc-
tion increased moderately. Contacts noted that a lack of 
available lots and high materials costs continued to 
restrain growth. Residential real estate activity remained 
vibrant, particularly in the single-family market. Home 
prices rose slightly, while rents rose marginally. Nonresi-
dential construction decreased some. Commercial real 
estate activity fell modestly, as did prices and rents. 
Contacts reported an increase in requests for shorter 
leases. Sublease space increased modestly as some 
tenants, particularly in the office sector, reduced their 
footprint in response to increased teleworking. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased moderately in Octo-
ber and early November but remained below where it 
was before the pandemic began. Auto output continued 
to rebound and was near its pre-pandemic level. Steel 
production increased moderately, with reports of greater 
demand from the construction, auto, and appliance 
industries. Sales of specialty metals were mixed. De-
mand for heavy machinery rose slightly, driven by the 
automotive and construction sectors. Demand for heavy 
trucks increased strongly, helped by higher carrier prof-
its. Manufacturers of building materials reported a small 
increase in shipments, supported by growth in residential 
construction. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly over the report-
ing period. Participants in the equity and bond markets 
reported a small improvement in conditions, though 
volatility remained elevated in light of the pandemic and 
election. Business loan demand increased modestly, 
with contacts highlighting increases in small business 
banking. Contacts also reported an increase in requests 
for equipment financing. Business loan quality deteriorat-
ed slightly, with declines concentrated in the hospitality, 
retail, and commercial real estate sectors. Business loan 
standards tightened modestly. In consumer markets, 
loan demand increased somewhat, led by growth in 
residential mortgages. Contacts reported that delinquen-
cies had slightly increased as accounts exited deferral 
programs but remained at low levels. Loan quality de-
creased slightly, while loan standards tightened modest-
ly. Contacts continued to report high levels of deposits 
for both businesses and households. 
Agriculture 
Farm income beat expectations for the growing season, 
as prices for key agricultural commodities moved higher 
and government support continued. Corn, soybean, and 
wheat prices were up again, reflecting tighter stocks and 
increased exports. With the harvest nearly over, most of 
the District saw above-trend corn and soybean yields. 
Most specialty crops had solid yields as well. Favorable 
weather conditions allowed farmers to complete field 
work that had been skipped in prior years because of 
poor weather. Dairy prices were mixed, but up on net. 
Hog and cattle producers also benefited from higher 
overall prices, but expressed concern about rising feed 
costs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from District contacts suggest economic activity has continued to increase slightly since the previous report; 
however, conditions deteriorated toward the end of the reporting period. The pace of activity continues to remain highly 
variable across sectors. Employment has increased slightly, while wages have increased modestly. Consumer prices 
increased slightly; however, nonlabor input costs have experienced stronger increases. The overall outlook for business 
conditions over the next 12 months has improved but remains slightly pessimistic.    
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased slightly since the previous 
report. The strongest growth was reported in manufac-
turing, transportation, and healthcare. Expanding firms 
continued to note labor supply shortfalls, ascribing it to 
workers' childcare and health concerns. One firm sought 
new employees in neighborhoods without adequate 
transportation by expanding a bus system to and from its 
warehouses. However, half of contacts reported remain-
ing below pre-pandemic employment levels. Staffing 
contacts noted that many firms remained hesitant to hire 
or re-hire workers in the face of policy uncertainty and 
COVID-19 resurgences. Some firms—particularly small 
firms and those in the leisure and hospitality industry—
exhibited more mixed employment trends. 
Wages have grown modestly. Two-thirds of contacts 
reported raising wages for new and existing employees 
due to labor shortages, especially for low-wage and high
-contact positions; one staffing firm instituted a minimum 
wage at which it would hire industrial workers for clients, 
believing it impossible to fill vacancies otherwise. Small-
firm wage growth remained more mixed, with many 
reportedly unable to compete with larger firms’ raises. 
Prices  
Input prices have increased strongly. However, contacts 
reported only a slight growth in prices charged to con-
sumers, indicating that very little of the increased input 
cost is being passed on to consumers. Raw materials 
prices have increased moderately overall; agriculture 
contacts noted that prices are at a yearly high, which 
contacts attributed to low yields nationally paired with 
healthy demand for staple crops such as corn and wheat 
both domestically and from China. Coal and lumber 
prices have declined since the previous report. A lumber 
yard contact noted that with inventories back to normal 
levels, lumber prices have declined 40% after spiking in 
recent months, putting them back at average levels 
compared with prices in previous years. A real estate 
contact noted that the price of plumbing materials has 
increased. Another contact noted increases in container-
board prices due to higher demand from online shopping 
coupled with lower supply from COVID-19 and natural-
disaster-related production delays. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hospi-
tality contacts indicated that consumer spending activity 
has been mixed since our previous report. Over the 
course of October, seasonally adjusted credit and debit 
card spending generally declined across the District. As 
of early November, general retailers and restaurants 
reported mixed business activity. Auto dealers reported 
that current-quarter sales have met or exceeded expec-
tations. Dealers cited low interest rates and gas prices 
helping to bolster sales. Tourism and hospitality contacts 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
reported that current-quarter sales fell short of expecta-
tions and continued to be much lower than they were 
during the same period last year. Hospitality contacts 
expect business activity to decline in the coming months. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has strongly increased since our 
previous report. Survey-based indices suggest that 
manufacturing activity moderately increased in Arkansas 
and strongly increased in Missouri. In both states, firms 
reported a strong uptick in new orders and production. 
Auto manufacturers in south central Kentucky and south-
ern Indiana reported high levels of production. Firms 
reported that supply chain issues that were previously 
constricting production have mostly been resolved. One 
contact noted that containerboard paper manufacturers 
are seeing increased demand, but some mills are experi-
encing slowed back production due to minimal crew 
schedules in response to COVID-19 precautions. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has been 
mixed since our previous report. Airport passenger traffic 
appears to be declining further relative to last year as 
business travel remains minimal and rising numbers of 
COVID cases lead to holiday travel cancellations. A 
parcel services contact indicated that business has 
improved, and the firm is already experiencing holiday-
level activity. Several trucking contacts were optimistic 
about the industry going into 2021, as fewer competitors 
remain in business. Feedback from other logistics con-
tacts was mixed regarding both sales in the previous 
quarter and the outlook for the next quarter, with one 
citing a lack of demand. A healthcare contact reported 
lower-than-expected sales last quarter, given increased 
apprehension about seeking health services. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has increased modestly 
since our previous report. Home sales remain robust for 
this time of the year and inventory levels remain low. A 
St. Louis-based contact noted that lower interest rates 
are a major factor in the increased demand for homes 
and thus why selling prices are rising.  
Residential construction activity has remained un-
changed since the previous report. Contacts noted that 
high demand for residential real estate is driving new 
residential construction, as there continues to be low 
residential inventory. Contacts also noted that construc-
tion is limited by lack of building materials, and a contact 
in St. Louis reported that the spike in COVID-19 cases is 
forcing them to regularly quarantine workers due to 
outside exposure.  
Commercial real estate activity has been mixed since 
our previous report. Demand is down for both retail and 
office space, with contacts reporting a loss of retail ten-
ants. Contacts in Memphis expect a loss of tenants as 
leases come to an end. However, demand for industrial 
space remains high, particularly for warehouse and 
manufacturing space, with demand expected to remain 
high or increase in the next quarter.   
Commercial construction activity has been mixed. Con-
tacts observed that most speculative activity in the office 
and retail space has ceased. However, construction for 
industrial space remained strong due to high market 
demand, with multiple active projects across the region. 
Contacts reported that large distribution companies are 
buying up new speculative inventory in order to quickly 
expand capacity.   
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have experienced little 
change since the previous report. Overall loan demand 
remained low due to the pause in business activity fol-
lowing the recent surge in COVID-19 cases in the Dis-
trict. Residential real estate loans increased slightly, led 
by elevated refinancing activity to lock-in favorable rates. 
Banking contacts continued to report high levels of de-
posits despite lower rates paid on interest-bearing ac-
counts. Delinquency rates remained generally low; how-
ever, some contacts observed a slight uptick in deferred 
payments among hospitality and commercial real estate 
clients. Competition for new loans and lower interest 
rates continued to narrow net interest margins. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have remained unchanged 
since our previous reporting period. Production forecasts 
for corn, cotton, and soybeans have decreased, while 
cotton production forecasts have increased. Production 
levels for corn, rice, and soybeans are expected to be 
significantly higher than in 2019, while cotton production 
is expected to see a moderate decline. District contacts 
expressed optimism, citing higher-than-expected yields 
due to excellent weather conditions and a strong re-
bound in prices. 
Natural resource extraction conditions declined modestly 
from September to October, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production declining around 3%. Production is still 
struggling overall, declining 24% from a year ago. Con-
tacts reported reducing employee hours and offering 
early retirement options as a result of the industry strug-
gles. ■ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report, but some signs of softening appeared recently 
as COVID-19 infections surged. Employment rose modestly since the last report, but conditions were volatile. Wage 
pressures were moderate and appeared to be increasing for some, while price pressures were modest. Consumer 
spending, manufacturing, energy, and residential construction and real estate grew since the previous report. Commer-
cial construction and real estate activity fell. Agricultural conditions improved slightly.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment rose modestly since the last report, but 
conditions were volatile and likely to remain so in the 
face of rising COVID-19 infections. A survey of District 
construction firms in late October found that firms were 
hiring overall, particularly in skilled trades. However, 
hiring sentiment for the coming months was somewhat 
softer. A handful of ad hoc surveys of Minnesota firms in 
November showed similar findings. Job postings have 
seen modest-but-steady growth through mid-November 
across most District states. A western South Dakota 
contact said many firms were “desperate for help,” a 
situation worsened by visa programs that were no longer 
a reliable labor source. However, there was widespread 
concern over new, pandemic-related restrictions on 
business activity and employment. Some indicators also 
showed small business employment falling steadily in 
October through mid-November. Initial unemployment 
insurance claims increased in the last half of October, 
due in part to normal seasonality, but were nonetheless 
several times their level last year. The number of 
workers receiving unemployment benefits steadily 
declined through October, but remained high overall, 
especially among minority workers. Though 
unemployment has been dropping steadily, state 
government contacts noted that falling labor force 
participation was responsible for much of the recent 
drop. 
Labor constraints became more pronounced, particularly 
in sectors, such as health care, experiencing worker 
shortages due to COVID-19-related quarantines. Firms 
also reported difficulty filling open positions, frequently 
citing enhanced unemployment benefits as a work 
disincentive. However, workforce contacts noted that the 
expiration of more generous benefits has not led to a big 
increase in job seekers. Other obstacles—child care 
availability, virtual school for households with children, 
and virus fears—also impacted labor participation, 
particularly among women. A Minnesota contact noted 
that workforce systems were “failing to reach” those 
most negatively affected, particularly African American 
and noncollege-educated workers.  
Wage pressures were moderate and appeared to be 
increasing for some. More District businesses reported 
raising average wages than cutting them. Certain sectors 
like construction were seeing greater wage pressures, 
and sources also noted bonuses and temporary wage 
hikes for frontline retail workers, higher entry-level 
wages, and reinstatement of pre-pandemic wage levels 
that had been cut. Pressures were not uniform, however. 
A large Minnesota nonprofit said that frontline staff 
received wage increases related to virus exposure, while 
other staff have been laid off or had wages frozen.  
Prices  
Price pressures since the previous report were modest 
overall. A majority of firms responding to recent 
Minneapolis Fed surveys reported little or no change to 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
nonlabor input costs and final prices compared with pre-
pandemic levels. By contrast, more than half of 
respondents from the construction industry reported 
input price increases of greater than 5 percent. 
Respondents also expected a similar rate of price 
increases over the coming year, consistent with rapid 
growth in construction materials prices. Home heating 
costs were expected to rise more in District states than 
nationwide this winter, largely due to regional differences 
in the prices of natural gas and greater demand due to 
work from home. Retail fuel prices in District states as of 
mid-November fell slightly from the previous reporting 
period. Prices received by farmers in September 
increased from a year earlier for soybeans, wheat, dry 
beans, cattle, hogs, eggs, and turkeys, while prices for 
corn, hay, potatoes, chickens, and milk decreased. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending grew slightly overall. Car and truck 
sales rose modestly in October compared with a year 
earlier, and contacts noted strong demand for 
recreational and powersport vehicles. However, 
spending was checked by softening demand at retail, 
restaurant, accommodation, and other firms more 
directly affected by rising COVID-19 infections. 
Numerous ad hoc polls showed that (self-reported) 
consumer spending remained below pre-pandemic 
levels, and future spending would be influenced by 
infection trends. Strong outdoor activity has lingered; 
visits to most of the District’s major national parks rose in 
October compared with last year, and Mackinac Bridge 
traffic to Michigan’s Upper Peninsula also rose over the 
same period. However, leisure travel through District 
airports as of mid-November had leveled off after  
modest-but-steady growth through September.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction fell moderately since the last 
report. Industry data showed a slowing of new and active 
projects in the District. A survey of construction firms in 
late October found that 40 percent saw revenues decline 
compared with earlier in the pandemic, and a slightly 
smaller share saw revenues increase. Firms were also 
more pessimistic about revenues in the coming months 
due to a shrinking pipeline of new projects. A minority-
owned contractor in the western part of the District said 
the company had a fraction of its typical workload due to 
COVID-19-related cutbacks in spending on government 
projects. “There is very little work out there … and prices 
are being driven down drastically as contractors are all 
bidding for the same projects.” However, prospects in 
Minnesota improved with the state’s recent passage of a 
record-high $1.8 billion bonding bill. Residential 
construction continued to outperform other industry 
segments, in both recent project activity and planned 
future work, according to the recent survey. Most of the 
District’s metros saw growth in single-family permitted 
units in October compared with a year earlier.  
Commercial real estate fell modestly since the last 
report. Vacancy rates have risen across most categories, 
particularly in retail and office space. Industrial vacancy 
rose slightly in Minneapolis-St. Paul but was still 
considered healthy. While federal and state eviction 
moratoriums were keeping people housed, rent 
collections at lower-priced units in Minnesota were 
reportedly falling faster than at higher-priced units. 
Rising nonpayments were also squeezing smaller 
landlords, who have fewer options for mortgage 
forbearance than larger landlords. Residential real estate 
saw robust growth, with closed home sales in October 
seeing double-digit growth across the District. A 
Minneapolis-St. Paul contact said demand was 
“relentless.” Low inventories of homes have also resulted 
in strong increases in median sale prices.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased briskly since the 
previous report. A regional manufacturing index 
indicated strong growth in October in Minnesota and 
South Dakota compared with a month earlier, with 
positive but more moderate growth in North Dakota. A 
producer of cleaning equipment was expanding 
operations as it sought to in-source more if its supply 
chain. A manufacturer of home furnishings reported 
difficulty keeping up with strong demand due to 
pandemic-related safety measures.   
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
Agricultural conditions improved slightly due to solid 
harvests, recent increases in prices for some 
commodities, and federal relief aid. Respondents to the 
Minneapolis Fed’s third-quarter (October) survey of 
agricultural credit conditions mostly reported unchanged 
farm income compared with a year earlier, while the 
outlook for the fourth quarter was for increasing farm 
incomes. District oil and gas activity increased slightly 
from low levels; the number of active drilling rigs was 
little changed since the last report, while oil production 
increased from its lows earlier in the year but remained 
below pre-pandemic output. District iron ore mines were 
operating at normal levels except for one idled facility 
that was scheduled to reopen in December. Contacts in 
nonferrous mining described activity as steady. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Tenth District economy continued to expand slightly in October and November, although activity remained below pre-
pandemic levels in several sectors. After rising in October, consumer spending fell slightly in November due to a pullback 
in retail, restaurant, auto and tourism sales. However, contacts expected sales in all consumer segments to rebound in 
the months ahead. Manufacturing production and new orders expanded modestly, and capital expenditures were ex-
pected to rise at both non-durable and durable goods plants. Transportation and wholesale trade sales picked up moder-
ately, and sales rose modestly in the professional and high-tech sector. Home sales and prices increased and were well 
above year-ago levels even as inventories fell further. Commercial real estate conditions worsened modestly, and addi-
tional declines were expected in the months ahead. Energy activity held steady, and the farm economy improved moder-
ately as agricultural commodity prices increased. Employment rose slightly, but remained modestly below year-ago levels. 
Wages continued to rise, and modest gains were anticipated in the next few months. Input prices rose at a faster pace 
than selling prices, and most industries expected additional price gains moving forward. 
 
Employment and Wages 
District employment increased slightly during the survey 
period, but remained modestly below year-ago levels. 
Growth was driven by increases in health services and 
retail employment, but was held back by moderate de-
clines in the restaurant and tourism sectors. Manufactur-
ing contacts noted a slight increase in employment, and 
contacts expected additional gains in the coming 
months. Employment expectations within the services 
sector were mixed, with the biggest gains expected in 
retail and wholesale trade and the biggest losses ex-
pected in auto and professional and high-tech services. 
A majority of contacts in the services sector reported 
labor shortages, indicating a need for truck drivers and 
retail, restaurant, and technology staff. Wages rose 
modestly in October, followed by smaller gains in No-
vember, leaving wages modestly above year-ago levels. 
Modest wage increases were expected moving forward. 
Over the next year, most firms expected employment to 
increase or remain unchanged, although a lesser num-
ber still expected declines. Contacts cited expected 
sales growth and the need to expand the current skillset 
of employees as the primary reasons for hiring. 
Prices 
Input prices rose moderately, outpacing modest gains in 
selling prices in both the services and manufacturing 
sectors. Contacts in the retail and restaurant sectors 
indicated that growth in selling prices was expected to 
accelerate in the coming months. Prices for raw materi-
als and finished products in the manufacturing sector 
followed a similar pattern, but although selling prices 
were expected to grow more quickly moving forward, raw 
materials prices were still expected to rise at a faster 
pace. Transportation input prices rose moderately in 
October but edged down in November, while selling 
prices rose modestly. Transportation contacts expected 
moderate gains in the coming months. Construction 
supply contacts indicated that selling prices grew moder-
ately, but expected them to fall in the winter months. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased slightly in October, but 
decreased slightly in November. Moderate gains in retail 
and health services drove the rise in October. However, 
a slight decline in retail sales combined with modest 
decreases in restaurant and auto sales and moderate 
declines in tourism led to an overall decline in November 
sales activity, despite an increased pace of sales in 
health services. Despite the drop in retail sales in No-
vember, activity remained moderately above year-ago 
levels. However, tourism and restaurant sales remained 
well below year-ago levels. In November, respondents 
from all sectors expected positive growth in the months 
ahead, with tourism and restaurant sectors expecting 
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
modest gains for the first time since spring. The majority 
of firms indicated that developments related to COVID 
have pushed their firm to either expand, implement for 
the first time, or create a plan to implement an online 
business segment. 
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity 
Manufacturing activity expanded modestly since the 
previous survey, but still remained modestly below year-
ago levels. Production and new orders increased mod-
estly for both durable and non-durable goods, but dura-
ble goods activity remained moderately below year-ago 
levels. By contrast, nondurables contacts indicated that 
production was slightly above year-ago levels for the first 
time since February. Expectations were positive as 
contacts in the durables and non-durables sectors ex-
pected modest and moderate gains, respectively. Capital 
expenditures were expected to increase modestly in both 
sectors. Many contacts indicated that the uncertainty 
surrounding the pandemic and related business re-
strictions/ policies was restraining hiring plans. 
Outside of manufacturing, sales in transportation and 
wholesale trade increased moderately, and sales and 
capital expenditures in professional and high-tech ser-
vices rose modestly. For the latter, this marked an im-
provement from declines in late summer. Contacts in 
transportation and wholesale trade expected moderate 
gains, while those in professional and high-tech services 
anticipated modest declines. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity increased moderately, 
while commercial real estate conditions continued to 
worsen at a modest pace. Despite additional declines in 
home inventories, sales increased modestly, leading to 
moderate gains in home prices. Home sales and prices 
were strongly above year-ago levels, and this trend was 
expected to continue in the coming months. Construction 
supply sales continued to rise modestly, but were ex-
pected to decline heading into the winter months. Com-
mercial real estate conditions worsened, as vacancy 
rates rose, developers had difficulty accessing credit, 
and there were slight decreases in absorption rates, 
sales, prices, and construction. Commercial rents edged 
down in October but were unchanged in November, the 
first month without a decline since February. Contacts 
indicated that rents were expected to hold steady moving 
forward, although overall commercial real estate condi-
tions were expected to worsen modestly. 
Banking 
In recent weeks, bankers reported a slight increase in 
overall loan demand. Gains were driven by moderate 
increases in residential real estate loan demand and 
slight increases in commercial real estate loan demand. 
Consumer installment loan demand held steady, agricul-
tural loan demand decreased slightly, and commercial 
and industrial loan demand fell modestly. Credit stand-
ards tightened slightly for residential real estate, com-
mercial real estate, and commercial and industrial loans. 
Loan portfolio quality decreased slightly in comparison to 
a year ago, but bankers expected significant decreases 
in loan quality over the next six months. Despite this, 
deposit levels remained strong. Overall, bankers were 
somewhat concerned with the continued stress on the 
economy due to the pandemic, although specific sectors, 
including residential real estate, remained strong. 
Energy 
District energy activity was relatively unchanged from the 
previous survey period, with revenues and drilling activity 
mixed across individual firms. Debt increases and bank-
ruptcies continued for several regional firms, while other 
contacts reported positive net income and capital ex-
penditure plans. Firms expected additional mergers and 
acquisitions moving forward. Many contacts reported 
additional efficiency gains and continued investment in 
innovations to lower operating costs. The number of 
active oil and gas rigs in the District increased slightly in 
October and November, due to gains in New Mexico and 
Oklahoma. However, the number of active rigs remained 
below year-ago levels. Oil prices held relatively steady, 
and natural gas prices rose. However, prices for oil and 
gas remained below the average price District firms 
reported needing for drilling to be profitable. 
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy improved moderately 
since the previous period alongside additional increases 
in agricultural commodity prices. Since early October, 
strengthening demand and downward revisions to pro-
duction estimates led to sharp increases in corn and 
soybean prices and moderate increases in most other 
agricultural prices. Stronger profit opportunities than 
earlier in the year, in addition to substantial government 
payments to producers, supported farm sector finances. 
Although farm income generally remained low in aggre-
gate, contacts reported lower rates of problem loans 
compared to a year ago. District contacts continued to 
express concerns, however, about the potential for re-
newed pressure in the months ahead, depending on the 
path of agricultural commodity prices, government sup-
port programs, and drought in some parts of the region. 
■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded at a modest pace, but activity in most industries remained below normal lev-
els. Recovery in the manufacturing, retail, and services sectors slowed. The housing market continued to outperform 
expectations, but office leasing remained weak. Overall loan volume fell, though residential real estate lending contin-
ued to be robust. Energy activity remained depressed but showed some signs of improvement. Employment rose mod-
estly, and several firms said weak demand and uncertainty about the course of the pandemic and/or related regulations 
were a drag on hiring. Input costs rose moderately, while selling prices were flat to up slightly. Outlooks were generally 
positive but uncertain, with political uncertainty and the trajectory of the pandemic weighing heavily on growth expecta-
tions for 2021. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment rose modestly, with continued reports of 
hiring in certain sectors such as single-family home 
construction and manufacturing. Most firms looking to 
hire said they’ve been able to do so without difficulty, 
though some staffing firms cited challenges due to un-
employment insurance benefits. Voluntary separations 
and/or job losses continued in the air transportation and 
energy sectors. Several firms said continued weak de-
mand and uncertainty about the course of the corona-
virus pandemic as well as related regulations and gov-
ernment policies were a drag on hiring, with a few noting 
it would take more than two years to reach their pre-
pandemic employment level.  
Wage growth remained subdued, with most firms noting 
that they were not raising salaries or wages to attract 
new hires or retain existing employees. Some contacts 
cited cutting pay in order to be able to keep employees 
on payrolls or recall furloughed workers. A few energy 
sector companies said they weren’t cutting compensa-
tion but encouraging retirement among older, more 
costly workers. An airline reported plans to cut non-
contract employees’ salaries in absence of additional 
government support.  
 
Prices 
Input costs continued to increase at a moderate pace, in 
part due to supply-chain issues. The exception was in 
oilfield services where costs declined due to weak de-
mand. Selling prices were flat to up slightly, with more 
marked increases reported in the construction and retail 
sectors. Contacts noted that pass-through of costs onto 
customers remained limited. 
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing activity continued to recover, though at a 
slower pace than in the previous reporting period. Output 
rose with growth led by primary metals, fabricated met-
als, construction-related, and food product manufactur-
ing. Several manufacturers, particularly those tied to the 
energy and the leisure and hospitality sectors, said de-
mand remained below normal. Petroleum refiners noted 
a slight increase in utilization rates, and chemical pro-
duction rose, but margins remained depressed due to 
weak demand and high inventories. Overall, outlooks 
among manufacturers remained positive, though uncer-
tainty persists. 
 
 
 
 
The Beige Book Ŷ November 2020 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Growth in retail sales slowed during the reporting period. 
Some firms experiencing continued sluggish demand 
attributed it to weakness in the oil and gas sector and in 
tourist activity. Auto sales remained weak partly due to 
low inventories. Hardware store sales have been boost-
ed by rising home renovation activity. Wholesalers of 
nondurable goods noted solid demand. Outlooks were 
somewhat optimistic, although political uncertainty aris-
ing from the election and increasing COVID-19 cases 
remain sources of concern. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Recovery in the nonfinancial services sector slowed 
following a surge in activity during the previous reporting 
period. However, activity in the information and profes-
sional and business services industries saw continued 
solid growth. Staffing firms noted a pickup in demand, 
particularly for healthcare, IT, online retail, and call cen-
ter services; however, activity remained below year-ago 
levels. Air cargo volumes rose. Airlines saw modest 
growth in bookings. Leisure travel to outdoor vacation 
destinations continued to dominate bookings, while 
corporate travel remained nearly nonexistent. Outlooks 
among airline contacts remained weak and further re-
duction in capacity was expected. Activity in the leisure 
and hospitality sector remained sluggish, and a contact 
noted that a sizable share of hotel owners in Corpus 
Christi would only be able to survive another six months 
without government assistance. Nonprofit organizations 
continued to face challenges due to lack of funding.  
In general, outlooks were marginally positive, with the 
resurgence of COVID-19 cases and political uncertainty 
continuing to weigh on sentiment. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market remained robust. Home 
sales continued to outperform expectations, particularly 
in suburban locations, and inventories remained excep-
tionally tight. Builders said they were raising home prices 
both to cover higher construction costs and to slow down 
sales given the heavy backlogs. New home development 
was active, and contacts noted that builders and devel-
opers were chasing land and lots. Outlooks were posi-
tive, with some concern about the impact on future sales 
of rising COVID cases, tight lot supply, and a weak labor 
market.  
Apartment demand held steady. Elevated supply contin-
ued to put downward pressure on apartment rents. Of-
fice leasing remained weak and sublease space rose as 
many firms continued to evaluate their space needs 
given that a sizeable share of their employees continued 
to work from home. Retail market conditions stayed 
fragile, while industrial demand remained strong driven 
by third party logistics and e-commerce activity. Invest-
ment sales have picked up for multifamily and industrial 
properties.  
Financial Services 
Overall loan volume dipped during the reporting period, 
with solid gains in residential real estate lending offset by 
declines in consumer and in commercial and industrial 
(C&I) loans. Loan pricing was competitive, and a few 
contacts voiced concerns about margin compression. 
Credit standards tightened, particularly for C&I and com-
mercial real estate loans. Nonperforming loans rose over 
the past six weeks, and over half of the respondents 
expect an increase in delinquencies six months from 
now. Perceptions of general business activity and out-
looks for loan demand stayed positive, though there 
were lingering concerns about political uncertainty, low 
net interest margins, and deteriorating asset quality.  
Energy 
The Eleventh District rig count rose over the reporting 
period. Well completions rose sharply as firms moved 
forward with bringing uncompleted wells into production. 
However, most contacts expect drilling and completion 
activity to level off soon and hold nearly flat through mid-
2021. Contacts said that the recovery of oil consumption 
remained their primary near-term concern, although 
political uncertainty surrounding potential changes in the 
regulatory environment was particularly worrisome for 
smaller exploration and production and fracking-services 
firms.   
Agriculture 
Drought conditions intensified, particularly in the western 
part of the district. Contacts remained concerned about 
the La Niña weather pattern and a dry winter diminishing 
2021 crop prospects. The harvest was wrapping up for 
2020 row crops, and prices pushed above breakeven 
levels for most producers. The livestock sector was 
facing headwinds of lower cattle prices and higher feed 
costs. Contacts were more optimistic about the agricul-
tural sector in general with stronger prices, solid export 
demand, and a more hopeful economic outlook. Ŷ  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded modestly on balance during the reporting period of October through 
mid-November. Employment levels increased slightly on net, though the pace of job recovery slowed down in certain 
regions. Wages increased marginally, whereas price inflation showed little to no change on balance. Sales of retail 
goods rose appreciably, while conditions in the consumer and business services sectors remained unchanged overall. 
Manufacturing activity expanded moderately, with capacity utilization rates increasing a bit. Conditions in the agriculture 
sector also improved slightly. Residential real estate activity increased further, while commercial market conditions 
changed little on net. Lending activity increased at a mild pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment levels increased slightly on net. A large 
logistics and distribution firm with a national presence 
reported continued strength in hiring activity, as did 
construction and steel manufacturing firms. However, 
employers in the financial and energy sectors reported 
little to no change in their employment levels. In addition, 
employment in the hotel, restaurant, and entertainment 
industries remained well below pre-pandemic levels. In 
California and the Pacific Northwest, the job recovery 
pace slowed during the reporting period. A few contacts 
in California and Washington noted an unusual uptick in 
voluntary employee attrition, which they attributed to 
various reasons including changes in childcare needs, 
decisions to move out of state, or fear of contracting 
COVID-19. Several employers expressed difficulty at-
tracting qualified workers, especially in industries that 
require employees to be on-site, such as payment pro-
cessing companies, hotels, and food services. Some 
contacts in financial services mentioned implementing 
employee assistance programs and flexible work sched-
ules to allow employees to coordinate with their manag-
ers ways to accommodate them to meet their children’s 
schooling needs. 
Wages increased marginally, although conditions varied 
widely by industry. Wages continued to increase in con-
struction and financial services. Several contacts in 
California mentioned that the forthcoming change in the 
minimum wage taking effect in the new year would result 
in wage increases for most hourly workers. A wood 
product manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest reported 
plans to distribute year-end bonuses to reward employ-
ees for their efforts during the pandemic. Retail and 
other consumer-facing businesses reported little to no 
change in employee compensation. Employers in finan-
cial services and information technology mentioned 
reconsidering their wage structures as employees work 
remotely in areas with varying degrees of cost of living.        
Prices  
Price inflation showed little to no change on balance. 
Contacts in wholesale retail, energy, and food services 
reported stable prices. Prices of building and construc-
tion materials including wood products, wallboard, ce-
ment, and paint continued to be highly elevated. In-
creased demand from the automotive industry as well as 
from foreign markets put upward pressure on prices of 
recycled metals and steel products. In contrast, a few 
hoteliers noted recently further downward pressure on 
rates due to increased discounting by competitors. Pric-
es for crops such as nuts, grapes, and stone fruits were 
lowered mainly due to shipping constraints and export 
tariffs.  
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales rose appreciably over the reporting period. 
Many retailers moved up their holiday marketing by 
several weeks, and some have already benefited from 
an earlier start for holiday shopping. Online sales contin-
ued to be strong, and demand for home improvement 
goods, vehicles, delivery services and food products 
increased further. A contact in Southern California noted 
a recent spike in demand for bicycles. However, given 
the recent rise in COVID-19 cases and stricter contain-
ment measures across the District, brick-and-mortar 
stores expressed high uncertainty, with many  being 
cautious about stocking up for the holidays. Most retail-
The Beige Book ■ November 2020 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
ers expected the big shift to e-commerce to continue this 
holiday season, while overall sales volume is expected 
to be flat or slightly lower compared with last year. Sev-
eral grocers reported intermittent supply issues and low 
inventories of certain products.  
Conditions in the consumer and business services sec-
tors remained unchanged overall. Activity remained 
strong in information technology, health care, and legal 
services. Logistics and transportation services reported 
continued strength in home deliveries and increasing 
holiday shipments. A contact in Southern California 
noted that demand for lodging in areas within easy driv-
ing distance of major metropolitan areas increased in the 
fall, especially among younger people. However, weak-
ening activity in leisure and travel industries began in 
mid-October, and restaurants and hotels continued to 
operate at fractional capacities. Furthermore, contacts 
across the District expressed concern over renewed 
containment measures, including shutting down or re-
ducing capacities for indoor dining, gyms, movie thea-
ters, and beauty services. One contact in Hawaii sug-
gested that lower levels of tourism may be at least par-
tially attributable to testing and quarantine protocols.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing expanded moderately, with capacity 
utilization rates improving. Demand for manufactured 
wood products and building materials remained strong, 
as residential construction continued its rebound. A 
wood products manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest 
reported most sawmills were operating at near capacity, 
though still somewhat constrained by COVID-19, with 
related staff shortages and challenges in acquiring raw 
materials. Sales of recycled metals and fabricated steel 
products increased further, underpinned by strong de-
mand from the automotive industry. Although energy 
usage by manufacturers has mostly rebounded from its 
lows, it has slowed down somewhat, which one contact 
attributed to a slowing recovery of the manufacturing 
sector as winter approaches. Durable goods orders 
increased robustly as businesses resumed investment, 
though several contacts reported continued disruptions 
to supply chains.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector increased slightly. The 
harvest for most agricultural crops, including grains and 
potatoes, has been completed in the Pacific Northwest 
and California, and ample water supply has contributed 
to high yields. International demand for wheat, raisins, 
and nuts has increased recently due to droughts in other 
parts of the world as well as a slight depreciation of the 
dollar. Despite the increase in exports, inventories re-
mained elevated, especially for raisins, nuts, and al-
monds. Domestic demand for logs and timber continued 
to be strong, and demand from Asia increased. Several 
contacts expressed concern over the short to medium-
term impact that wildfires could have on crops as well as 
on wood supply. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential construction activity continued to grow 
strongly, supported by low interest rates and the current 
telework environment. Contacts throughout the District 
reported increased demand for new and existing homes, 
especially in suburban areas and vacation home destina-
tions, which kept inventories low and raised home prices 
further. Activity in the multifamily property sector was 
mixed, with lower rents and higher vacancies in metro-
politan areas, while the opposite occurred in suburban 
areas. Several contacts noted increases in construction 
costs and longer project timelines due to labor shortages 
and supply chain disruptions. A contact in the Pacific 
Northwest noted that many people who were impacted 
by the wildfires plan to rebuild their homes, which could 
further spur demand for construction labor and materials. 
Activity in the commercial real estate market was little 
changed on net. Although commercial construction pro-
jects that began prior to the pandemic continued, new 
development projects were put on hold. Demand for 
commercial office and retail space continued to be weak 
throughout the District. By contrast, demand for new 
industrial and warehouse spaces increased in the Pacific 
West. A contact in Washington noted plans for a large 
new warehouse facility in their region.    
Financial Institutions  
Overall lending activity increased at a mild pace. Most of 
the demand continued to be for residential and commer-
cial real estate loans, particularly refinancing. Demand 
for auto loans continued to grow, albeit at a slower pace 
as compared with the summer. Demand for commercial 
and industrial loans edged down slightly, and utilization 
of commercial lines of credit remained low. In contrast, 
consumer lending activity has picked up a bit. Deposits 
continued to grow at double-digit rates, and deposit rates 
declined further. Banks noted strong asset quality, with 
low delinquency rates and ample liquidity. Several con-
tacts across the District expressed concern over poten-
tial loan losses in the coming months should payment 
deferrals and mortgage forbearances no longer be ex-
tended. A contact in Southern California noted that capi-
tal markets and investment activities have rebounded in 
recent months, especially in the sustainability and clean 
technology areas. ■ 


