The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
December 5, 2018 
November 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
based on information collected on or before November 26, 2018. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Most of the twelve Federal Reserve Districts reported that their economies expanded at a modest or moderate pace 
from mid-October through late November, though both Dallas and Philadelphia noted slower growth compared with the 
prior Beige Book period. St. Louis and Kansas City noted just slight growth. On balance, consumer spending held 
steady – District reports on growth of nonauto retail sales appeared somewhat weaker while auto sales tended to im-
prove, particularly for used cars. Tourism reports varied but generally kept pace with the economy. Tariffs remained a 
concern for manufacturers, but a majority of Districts continued to report moderate growth in the sector. All Districts 
reported growth in nonfinancial services – ranging from slight to strong. New home construction and existing home 
sales tended to decline or hold steady, while construction and leasing of nonresidential structures tended to rise or 
remain flat. Overall, lending volumes grew modestly, although a few Districts noted some slowing. Agricultural condi-
tions and farm incomes were mixed; some Districts noted impacts from excessive rainfall and from tariffs, which have 
constrained demand. Most energy sectors saw little change or modest growth. Most Districts reported that firms re-
mained positive; however, optimism has waned in some as contacts cited increased uncertainty from impacts of tariffs, 
rising interest rates, and labor market constraints.  
Employment and Wages 
Labor markets tightened further across a broad range of occupations. Over half of the Districts cited firms for which 
employment, production, and sometimes capacity expansion had been constrained by an inability to attract and retain 
qualified workers. In fact, several Chicago firms reported that some employees have simply quit – with no notice nor 
means of contact. Partly as a consequence of labor shortages, most Districts reported that employment growth leaned 
to the slower side of a modest to moderate pace. Conversely, most Districts reported that wage growth tended to the 
higher side of a modest to moderate pace. In addition to raising wages, most Districts noted examples of firms enhanc-
ing nonwage benefits, including health benefits, profit-sharing, bonuses, and paid vacation days.  
Prices 
On balance, prices rose at a modest pace in most Districts, although a few noted moderate increases. Nearly all report-
ed that input costs rose faster than final goods prices. Reports of tariff-induced cost increases have spread more 
broadly from manufacturers and contractors to retailers and restaurants. Local growing conditions caused prices to 
vary across farm products and among Districts, but reported soybean prices were typically lower. Several Districts 
noted falling oil and fuel prices, as well as rising freight costs. House prices continued to rise in a majority of markets.  
Boston 
Activity continued expanding at a moderate pace accord-
ing to business contacts across most sectors. Staffing 
firms said labor markets were very tight across industries 
and occupations, while retailers and manufacturers cited 
shortages only for selected jobs. Increases in selling and 
input prices were reported to be modest. 
 
New York 
The regional economy expanded at a modest pace in the 
latest reporting period, while labor markets remained 
exceptionally tight. Widespread escalation in firms’ input 
prices have continued, but wages and selling prices 
have increased more moderately. Tourism has picked 
up, while housing markets have softened somewhat. 
Banks noted widespread improvement in delinquencies. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest pace, 
although it appears to have eased a bit, with downshifts 
(or declines) in five distinct sectors. Lack of qualified 
labor has constrained hiring and raised wage pressure. 
Price increases remained modest. Nevertheless, firms 
remain generally positive about the six-month outlook. 
Cleveland 
The District economy grew modestly. Demand was 
strong in banking, manufacturing, and nonfinancial ser-
vices. Consumer demand improved slightly, but housing 
demand softened. Staff levels rose moderately, and 
wage pressures were widespread. Input costs rose 
strongly in all industries. Contacts noted that tariffs were 
lifting prices further down the supply chain. Selling prices 
rose with less intensity than they did for input costs. 
Richmond 
The regional economy continued to grow at a moderate 
rate since our previous report. Labor demand strength-
ened further while wage growth remained modest. Price 
growth increased slightly but remained moderate, over-
all. Manufacturing and services firms saw a sharp in-
crease in input prices, which were attributed to tariffs, 
shipping costs, and some higher business-to-business 
and recruitment costs. 
Atlanta 
Economic conditions moderately improved. Tightness in 
the labor market persisted and more firms reported 
increasing wages. Nonlabor costs continued to rise. 
Retail sales increased across most of the District. Tour-
ism activity was positive. Residential real estate market 
activity was restrained, and commercial real estate activ-
ity remained solid. Manufacturers indicated that activity 
increased. Credit conditions were stable. 
Chicago 
Growth in economic activity was modest. Manufacturing 
production grew moderately; employment, consumer 
spending, and business spending increased modestly; 
and construction and real estate activity decreased 
slightly. Wages and prices rose modestly and financial 
conditions were little changed. Large yields led agricul-
tural conditions to improve some. 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have slightly improved since our 
previous report. Labor market conditions remain tight, 
and many firms report raising wages and salaries to 
attract new workers. The outlook among firms surveyed 
in mid-November was slightly optimistic, although weak-
er than the outlook one year ago. 
Minneapolis 
The Ninth District economy grew moderately. Hiring 
demand was robust, but a tight labor supply was re-
straining employment growth. Nevertheless, wage pres-
sures were moderate overall, with exceptions. Some 
firms reported paying a greater share of workers’ health 
insurance premium costs to attract and retain employ-
ees. Price growth was generally modest, though input 
prices saw more pressure. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity expanded slightly since the previous 
survey and remained modestly above year-ago levels. 
Employment and wages rose further, and about half of 
respondents expected to increase employment in the 
next twelve months. Manufacturing, wholesale trade, 
transportation, energy, and professional and high-tech 
sectors reported the strongest growth in the District, 
while the agriculture sector remained weak. 
Dallas 
Growth in economic activity slowed to a moderate pace. 
A broad-based softening was seen in manufacturing, 
retail, and housing. Drilling activity increased. Hiring 
continued, and widespread labor shortages pushed up 
wages. Price pressures eased but remained elevated in 
part due to the tariffs, and outlooks were less optimistic 
than the previous report. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Labor market conditions 
tightened further, and price inflation increased moderate-
ly. Sales of retail goods expanded somewhat, and activi-
ty in the consumer and business services sectors was 
solid. Conditions in the manufacturing sector strength-
ened. Activity in real estate markets was solid on bal-
ance. Lending activity ticked down modestly. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
First District economic activity in most sectors continued to expand at a moderate pace since the last report. Retailers 
reported moderate year-over-year sales growth, while Massachusetts restaurant sales rose modestly from a year earli-
er. Manufacturing firms saw revenues rise from a year ago, but at a somewhat disappointing pace. Most staffing firms 
reported modest to moderate year-over-year revenue growth, with some signs that the pace of growth slowed recently. 
Sales of single-family homes and condos declined from a year earlier in most New England reporting areas, while medi-
an sales prices continued to rise. Activity in commercial real estate markets remained mixed within the region, at a 
moderate level on average. Labor markets remained tight and wage increases continued at a moderate pace. Notwith-
standing labor-related costs, upward pressure on prices was said to be very modest. Most contacts continued to report 
a positive outlook, although some cited increased uncertainty or risks. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets continued to be tight, although many firms 
said they are able to hire as needed. Two-thirds of man-
ufacturing contacts expected flat employment at their 
firm and one-third expected growth. Manufacturers did 
not report any unusual difficulty finding qualified employ-
ees although an industrial distributor said that it had 
become increasingly difficult to find technical salespeo-
ple. Retailers said they have not had problems filling 
open positions, except for jobs specializing in information 
technology. Massachusetts restaurants continued to 
note acute labor shortages and higher labor costs, citing 
the Commonwealth’s recently implemented Employer 
Medical Assistance Contribution (EMAC) and scheduled 
hikes in the minimum wage. Staffing industry respond-
ents reported that continued low unemployment made 
recruiting very challenging. Most staffing firms reported 
increases in bill and pay rates, ranging from low single-
digit increases to 10 percent; one cited high-level IT jobs 
as a driving factor in increased bill rates. 
Prices  
Price increases were said to be modest. Manufacturing 
firms did not report strong pricing pressure either from 
customers or suppliers. An industrial distributor said they 
expected tariffs to contribute 50 to 100 basis points to 
price increases for their products. Only one manufacturer 
complained about high transportation costs, in contrast 
with recent reports when many noted high costs. Two 
retail contacts noted that wholesale prices have risen 
only modestly and that food prices were down about 0.4 
percent. Looking ahead to 2019, retailers expressed 
significant uncertainty about the impact that tariff in-
creases will have on prices—beyond some point, they 
will pass the increases on to consumers. One retailer 
said they will not be the first mover on raising prices but 
will watch to see what their competitors do. Massachu-
setts restaurant menu prices were up 2.6 percent from a 
year ago. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts reported comparable-store year-over-
year sales increases ranging from low single-digit to low 
double-digit percentages. All respondents remarked that 
consumer sentiment was strong and that they expected 
the fiscal year to end with low single-digit comparable-
store revenue increases. Capital spending plans for 
2019 were said to match or exceed investment in 2018. 
A contact in the Massachusetts restaurant industry re-
ported that revenues were up about 2 percent year-over-
year through September, but cautioned that this result 
was largely driven by newly opened units, as sales at 
existing locations ranged from flat to up or down 1 per-
cent year-over-year. Anecdotally, restaurant sales were 
down year-over-year in October as “people stayed home 
to watch the World Series.” As noted earlier this year, 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
the cost challenges confronting the restaurant industry 
are expected to thin out the ranks; very recently, two 
iconic Massachusetts restaurant chains have closed 
units, as have some high-end Boston-area restaurants.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
All manufacturing contacts this cycle reported higher 
sales year-on-year. However, two-thirds of the six re-
spondents said the pace of growth was a little disap-
pointing. A furniture maker said sales growth had slowed 
relative to earlier in the year. Two semiconductor-related 
firms reported year-over-year sales growth had slowed 
to 12 percent and 10 percent; one attributed the slower 
growth to smartphones and the other to slowing demand 
for consumer devices more broadly. A defense contrac-
tor said they were having unusual difficulty with permits 
to sell to foreign customers. No contacts reported signifi-
cant revisions to their capital expenditure plans. 
Contacts were generally optimistic, even the ones with 
disappointing sales growth. One contact in industrial 
distribution said that there was industry chatter about a 
recession in the second half of 2019 but he saw no signs 
of that. A contact in the semiconductor industry said that 
people were concerned about the semiconductor indus-
try cycle but continued to expect growth in 2019. 
Staffing Services  
New England staffing firms reported mostly positive year
-over-year revenue growth, notwithstanding low or nega-
tive quarter-over-quarter growth rates. All firms noted 
labor supply shortages, regardless of the job’s industry, 
occupation, or placement type, while commenting on the 
high and healthy demand from clients. One company 
stated that they were hesitant to take on new clients 
because they could not fulfill orders from existing ones. 
Most respondents devoted additional resources to im-
prove recruitment: hiring more employees, investing in 
technology and social media, building relationships with 
local community groups, and increasing advertising. A 
few firms noted concerns about potential increases in 
health care costs and local minimum wages. Overall, 
staffing firms expressed optimism and expected tight 
labor market conditions to continue into 2019. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate markets remained mixed across 
the First District, with moderate activity on average. 
Leasing activity held steady at a slow pace in Connecti-
cut and picked up to a moderate pace in Rhode Island. 
In greater Portland, leasing demand remained strong, on 
average, despite having softened a bit in the industrial 
and retail markets. Boston-area contacts described office 
leasing activity as very robust. In both Boston and Provi-
dence, demand for industrial space—whether for lease 
or purchase—strengthened further. Following recent 
declines, office vacancy rates were described as histori-
cally low in Boston and very low in both Portland and 
Providence.  
Construction activity was also mixed, with negligible 
activity in Connecticut, moderate activity in Rhode Is-
land, and robust activity in the Portland and Boston 
areas. One Boston contact said that planned construc-
tion could yield a large quantity of new office space in 
the downtown area over the next five years, although 
rising construction costs—up some 15 percent in the 
past six months due to increases in both labor and mate-
rials costs—may crimp some projects. The outlook 
dimmed further in Connecticut and remained largely 
favorable elsewhere for the near term; some contacts 
cited increasing risks and uncertainty for late 2019.  
Residential Real Estate 
Most residential real estate markets in New England saw 
year-over-year sales declines in recent months. For 
single-family homes, closed sales decreased from Sep-
tember 2017 to September 2018 in Rhode Island, Mas-
sachusetts, Boston, and New Hampshire, while increas-
ing slightly from October to October in Maine. Median 
sales prices increased over the year in all reporting 
areas. For condos, sales decreased in Massachusetts, 
Boston, and New Hampshire, stayed flat in Maine, and 
increased in Rhode Island. Condo prices increased in 
Boston and Maine but decreased slightly in Rhode Is-
land, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. Vermont 
experienced an over-the-year decrease in sales for 
single-family homes and condos combined.  
Contacts cited lack of inventory, rising prices and interest 
rates, and market normalization as possible reasons 
behind the declining sales. A contact from Rhode Island 
noted that the cooling in housing suggested a more 
balanced and healthy market, “buyers … will likely have 
more properties to choose from in the year ahead.” A 
Massachusetts representative, by contrast, attributed the 
dwindling sales mainly to ongoing inventory shortages. 
Looking forward, residential real estate contacts across 
the region expressed optimistic views about the closing 
months of 2018. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has grown modestly in the latest reporting period. The labor market has re-
mained exceptionally tight, and wage growth has remained moderate. Businesses noted continued widespread escala-
tion in input costs but moderate increases in their own selling prices. Prices of final goods and services have generally 
held steady. Manufacturing and distribution activity continued to grow briskly, while growth in most service industries 
has been more subdued, though there has been a pickup in the leisure & hospitality industry—particularly tourism. 
Consumer spending has remained mostly steady in recent weeks. Housing markets have softened further, while com-
mercial real estate markets have been mixed. Finally, banks reported a pickup in loan demand from the business sector 
and a decline in delinquency rates across the board.     
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained exceptionally tight 
across the District. A broad swath of businesses contin-
ued to note problems finding qualified workers. Turnover 
has reportedly increased, and a few contacts cited in-
stances where new hires left for another job soon after or 
even before their start date. A couple contacts lost exist-
ing and prospective skilled workers due to immigration 
restrictions, including H-1B visas not being renewed.  
Businesses reported steady to modestly rising employ-
ment, on balance. Firms in manufacturing, transporta-
tion, and information reported a modest pickup in hiring 
activity, and most retailers noted a typical seasonal 
pickup. Contacts in education & health, leisure & hospi-
tality, finance, and wholesale again reported moderate 
net hiring. A large retail chain hired about the same 
number of holiday-season workers as in 2017, but the 
mix shifted a bit from in-store to supporting on-line sales. 
An upstate New York employment agency noted that 
clients are increasingly interested in direct hires versus 
contract workers. 
Wage pressures remained widespread, though contacts 
in most industries noted that overall wage growth has 
been moderate. One contact did note a spike in salaries 
of college grads in tech fields. A few contacts noted 
increased use of non-wage benefits to attract and retain 
staff, such as increased health benefits and profit-
sharing. A number of business contacts in New York 
State, mostly manufacturers, expressed concern about 
the upcoming minimum wage hike. One contact ex-
pressed concern about an upcoming jump in New York’s 
threshold for counting workers as exempt from overtime.            
Prices  
Businesses reported continued widespread escalation in 
input prices but moderate hikes in selling prices. Input 
price pressures were particularly widespread in manu-
facturing, leisure & hospitality, and finance. Contacts 
across all industry sectors reported steady to moderately 
rising selling prices. A sizable proportion of businesses 
in leisure & hospitality, wholesale trade, and finance said 
they plan to hike prices in the months ahead.  
Retailers generally indicated that selling prices, as well 
as the degree of discounting, have remained stable. 
Similarly, prices for New York City hotel rooms and 
Broadway theater tickets have been fairly stable in re-
cent months.   
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were generally reported to be mixed but, on 
balance, steady in recent weeks. A major retail chain 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
noted that November sales were on plan and up modest-
ly from last year, helped by a strong Thanksgiving week-
end. Retailers in upstate New York reported that sales 
have been lackluster in November, with discounters out-
performing other stores. One contact attributed sluggish 
store sales to the ongoing shift to on-line shopping. 
Inventories were generally said to be in good shape.  
New vehicle sales were mostly flat in October and early 
November, according to dealers across upstate New 
York, but down from a year earlier—partly reflecting 
further reductions in incentives. New vehicle inventories 
were a bit on the high side. Sales of used vehicles, on 
the other hand, have been robust, with selling prices a 
bit higher than anticipated. Dealers indicated that credit 
conditions remained in good shape, though floor-plan 
credit has become a bit more expensive. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) retreated in October but remained near a cycli-
cal high, based on the Conference Board’s monthly 
survey.    
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers and wholesale distributors noted ongoing 
brisk growth in activity in the latest reporting period, 
while transportation firms indicated steady activity. Look-
ing to the months ahead, manufacturers continued to 
express fairly widespread optimism, while contacts in the 
wholesale trade and transportation industries were more 
guarded in their optimism. A few contacts continued to 
express concern about tariffs and recent and potential 
changes in trade policy.        
Services 
Growth has remained subdued in the latest reporting 
period. Contacts in professional & business services 
noted a pause in growth, while businesses engaged in 
the education & health, leisure & hospitality, and infor-
mation industries noted a pickup in growth. In one sign of 
a pickup in tourism, Broadway theaters reported strong 
gains in both attendance and revenues, both of which 
have been running 15-20 percent ahead of this time last 
year. Looking ahead, contacts in education & health and 
professional & business services were fairly optimistic 
about the near-term outlook, while leisure & hospitality 
firms expect business to be flat.          
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have softened fur-
ther, on balance, since the last report. In upstate New 
York, sales have slowed, and there have been fewer 
bidding wars, though the dearth of inventory has contin-
ued to boost selling prices. In New York City, sales of 
both existing co-ops and condos continued to weaken, 
while selling prices were flat to up slightly. The new 
development market has been very slack with sales and 
prices down noticeably. In Long Island, both home sales 
and prices have continued to rise but the pace has 
slowed. The inventory of unsold homes continued to rise 
in both New York City and Long Island, but it is still at a 
very low level. Much of the softening in and around New 
York City is attributed to a combination of increased 
financing costs, volatility in the financial markets, a drop 
in foreign purchasers, and changes in federal tax law 
that limit deductibility of homeowner costs. New York 
City’s apartment rental market has been mixed: vacancy 
rates edged down in response to increased landlord 
concessions—particularly in new developments—while 
effective rents have been flat to down slightly. 
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
mostly steady. Office availability rates were steady to up 
slightly, while asking rents were up modestly, on aver-
age. Retail markets were increasingly slack across most 
of the District, and there is concern that this trend will 
accelerate after the holiday season. In contrast, industri-
al markets have remained solid, with availability rates 
steady at or near multi-year lows and rents rising briskly 
across the New York City metropolitan region.    
New multi-family construction has been mixed but gener-
ally sluggish, though a substantial volume of residential 
development is currently under construction. New com-
mercial construction starts—office, industrial, hospitality, 
and especially retail—have been very subdued, though 
there remains a good deal of office and industrial space 
under construction in and around New York City.          
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
lower demand for consumer loans but stronger loan 
demand from the business sector. Bankers also reported 
a decrease in refinancing activity. Credit standards were 
unchanged across all categories. Bankers reported lower 
loan spreads for residential mortgages, commercial 
mortgages, and C&I loans, and unchanged loan spreads 
for consumer loans. Contacts also reported an increase 
in the average deposit rate. Finally, bankers indicated 
that delinquency rates declined across all loan catego-
ries.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current 
Beige Book period, although the pace appears to have eased somewhat. The labor market has tightened further, which 
continues to constrain hiring at a modest pace and to apply moderate upward wage pressures. Price pressures re-
mained modest. Nonfinancial services maintained a moderate pace of growth, while manufacturing eased back to a 
modest pace. Nonauto retail sales continued at a modest pace, and auto sales remained flat; however, tourism activity 
appeared to slow to a slight pace of growth. Construction activity appeared to be flat for residential homes and slightly 
declining for commercial sectors, while modest declines in existing home sales deteriorated to a moderate drop. Com-
mercial leasing maintained modest growth. The growth outlook over the next six months remained positive, with two-
thirds of the nonmanufacturing firms and over 40 percent of the manufacturers anticipating increases in general activity. 
Employment and Wages  
The pace of employment growth appears to have slowed 
somewhat during the current Beige Book period but 
remained modest overall. The share of nonmanufactur-
ing firms reporting an increase in full-time staff fell by half 
to less than one-fifth, while the share of manufacturing 
firms reporting an increase in net employment remained 
near one-fourth. However, average hours worked ap-
peared to fall for more manufacturing firms, while re-
maining about the same for nonmanufacturers.  
Numerous contacts from many sectors noted that jobs 
were going unfilled for a lack of qualified labor and that 
employee retention was a growing problem. One staffing 
firm noted that its roster of qualified job candidates is 
essentially tapped out – it has become very difficult to 
find qualified applicants to replenish its candidate pool.  
On balance, wage growth continued at a moderate pace. 
Various firm contacts speak of annual wage increases of 
around 3 percent. In fact, the percentage of the nonman-
ufacturing contacts who reported increases in wage and 
benefit costs fell to just over one-third from nearly half in 
the prior period. However, staffing firms in markets with 
lower unemployment rates report that their average 
wage is up as high as 6.5 percent over the prior year.  
Prices  
Price increases remained modest for most firms, with 
little change from the prior period. On balance, about 
one-fourth of the nonmanufacturing firms continued to 
report increases for prices paid and for prices received, 
and one-fourth of the manufacturing firms also reported 
increases for prices received. The share of manufactur-
ing firms reporting increases in prices paid remained just 
above 40 percent.  
One firm reported that it has passed along its costs from 
10 percent steel tariffs but that it expects customers to 
push back if the tariffs increase to 25 percent. Another 
firm had absorbed the 10 percent tariffs but is slowly 
raising prices now in anticipation of higher tariffs.  
Looking ahead six months, manufacturing firms contin-
ued to anticipate higher prices, with nearly 60 percent of 
the firms expecting increases in prices paid and in prices 
received for their own goods.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity eased back to a modest pace of 
growth – close to its nonrecession average. Likewise, 
the firms reported a decrease in new orders, while ship-
ments increased relative to the prior period.  
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
The makers of chemicals and of primary and fabricated 
metal products tended to note gains in new orders and 
shipments; the makers of paper products and of industri-
al and electronic equipment reported mixed results. 
Tariffs remained a major concern for many producers. 
Still, several firms reported that they were adding capaci-
ty, while others noted that operating capacity was con-
strained by shortages of qualified labor. However, a 
transportation analyst cautioned that new truck orders 
are at record levels and could be canceled if clear signs 
of a downturn emerge.  
On balance, manufacturers continued to expect general 
activity to increase over the next six months; however, 
expectations eased a bit – slightly below the nonreces-
sion average. Expectations of future increases in new 
orders, shipments, and employment remained nearly the 
same as the prior period and at high levels. Furthermore, 
expectations of future capital expenditures rose to nearly 
double the indicator’s nonrecession average.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retailers continued to report modest growth. 
Mall sales remained relatively strong, and contacts noted 
successful, innovative replacements for anchor stores 
that were closed because of bankruptcies. Convenience 
store sales continued to incrementally improve.  
On balance, auto sales remained flat compared with high 
2017 levels. According to dealers, October year-over-
year auto sales rose slightly – Pennsylvania dealers 
noted growth, while New Jersey sales were flat. Howev-
er, early estimates of New Jersey’s November sales 
suggest a decline, and dealers are now less optimistic 
for year-end sales.  
According to tourism contacts, activity appeared to grow 
at a slight pace overall – a bit slower than in the prior 
period. A Philadelphia analyst expects 2018 to be anoth-
er record year yet noted a somewhat slower growth rate 
in October and expectations for a slower fourth quarter. 
In Atlantic City, sports betting and online gambling con-
tinued to boost the total casino take in September and 
October; however, the take for the traditional casino slots 
and table games fell to single-digit growth. Moreover, 
after excluding the two new casinos, the casinos’ tradi-
tional take declined by more than 10 percent.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms continued to report 
moderate growth in general activity. The percentage of 
firms reporting increased sales edged up to near 60 
percent, and the percentage reporting increased new 
orders remained close to 33 percent. A media firm noted 
recent gains from election advertising but a “tepid” auto 
sector. Expectations of future growth held steady, with 
two-thirds of the firms anticipating increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report modest growth on a 
year-over-year basis in credit card lending and in overall 
loan volumes (excluding credit cards). However, during 
the current period, credit card lending (reported without 
seasonal adjustments) grew moderately compared with 
modest growth during the same period last year, while 
loan volumes (excluding credit cards) grew at a moder-
ate pace compared with slight growth.  
During the current period, volumes grew moderately in 
mortgages and in commercial and industrial lending; 
grew modestly in commercial real estate and in home 
equity lines; and declined slightly in autos and in other 
consumer loans (not elsewhere classified).  
Bankers continued to note rising deposit rate pressure 
and strong competition for quality loans. They continued 
to cite concerns that credit standards were slipping but 
noted few signs of credit quality deterioration.  
Real Estate and Construction 
According to homebuilders, activity appears relatively flat 
overall; a central Pennsylvania builder noted that traffic 
and sales disappeared during October and November, 
while a South Jersey builder noted moderate gains. Both 
builders said that construction activity had peaked or 
was peaking and that contractors were beginning to look 
for work. Existing home sales declined moderately 
across most local markets. “Inventory is hitting rock 
bottom,” according to one large Philadelphia broker.  
On balance, market analysts reported that construction 
of new commercial real estate may have declined a bit – 
apartment and warehouse projects remained steady, 
while office and retail projects began to wind down. One 
developer reported that its 2019 plan assumes that 
demand for warehouse space continues to outstrip sup-
ply but noted that warning signs were rising, including 
additional retail bankruptcies, rising interest rates, and 
lower housing starts. Analysts reported that effective 
rents rose for apartments and warehouse space but 
edged up, at best, for office and retail space. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District grew modestly during the survey period, with a majority of firms reporting stable 
customer demand. Demand was strong in banking, manufacturing, and nonfinancial services, whereas retail demand 
improved slightly, and housing demand softened. On balance, employers increased staff levels moderately to meet 
demand, though wage pressures were strong and widespread. Contacts in every industry noted that increased competi-
tion for labor was requiring them to boost compensation to retain workers. Nonlabor input costs rose strongly in all in-
dustries, led by metals, fuel, and transportation costs. Some contacts noticed that import tariffs were boosting prices 
further down the supply chain. Selling prices rose with less intensity than they did for input costs. 
Employment and Wages  
On balance, contacts reported moderate increases to 
their staff levels. Hiring activity was very strong in profes-
sional and business services, in which three-quarters of 
contacts reported adding workers. Skilled services aside, 
employers in many sectors gave mixed reports. Retail 
contacts noted that the increase in temporary employ-
ment for the holiday shopping season this year was 
comparable to holiday season increases in recent years. 
Many manufacturers increased headcounts to keep up 
with demand, but there was an uptick in reports of firms’ 
reducing headcounts. Finally, transportation firms pared 
their workforces because of lower seasonal demand and 
to gain efficiencies. Staff levels at construction firms 
were stable. 
Wage pressures were widespread. In every industry, 
contacts noted that increased competition for labor was 
requiring their firms to boost compensation in a variety of 
ways to retain workers. A number of manufacturers 
noted they increased wages between 0.5 percentage 
points and 1.0 percentage points over the rate of infla-
tion. One construction contact reported that starting 
salaries for new graduates was significantly higher this 
year than it was last year. One transportation employer 
remarked that his firm preferred to use recruitment and 
retention bonuses rather than wage increases. One 
clothing retailer noted that his firm felt pressure to raise 
its wages as other large retailers boosted their pay.   
Prices  
Nonlabor input costs rose strongly in all industries. High-
er metals prices because of import tariffs continue to be 
a pain point for manufacturers and construction firms, 
although an increasing number of contacts in these 
industries have been reporting stable prices in recent 
survey rounds. There were a number of reports of tariffs 
leading to higher prices further down the supply chain. 
One transportation contact reported that domestically 
produced maintenance parts were becoming more ex-
pensive because some components are imported from 
China. One retailer noted that her suppliers were in-
creasing their prices because of the tariffs. In addition to 
higher metals prices, contacts noted fuel, transportation, 
food, and polyresin cost increases.  
Final selling prices rose with slightly less intensity than 
they did for input costs. The majority of manufacturers 
held their prices, unlike during the previous five survey 
rounds, when a majority had raised selling prices. The 
manufacturers that raised their prices did not, for the 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
most part, report getting pushback from their customers. 
Some nonresidential builders were able to raise prices 
enough to increase their margins. One homebuilder 
noted, however, that his firm held its sticker prices but 
lowered effective prices by offering incentives on almost 
every deal. Nearly all nondurable-goods retailers held 
their prices, while auto dealers all reported higher prices. 
The majority of transportation firms found success rais-
ing their prices. One contact said he managed to raise 
his fees by 4 percent to 6 percent. Another transportation 
contact said he noticed that while shippers can secure 
higher rates, shipping customers were being more selec-
tive about nonprice factors, such as service and how the 
shipper handles its loads.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer demand improved slightly. Auto sales edged 
higher thanks to increased sales of used cars. Demand 
for new cars fell, however, as higher metals prices and 
rising interest rates eroded affordability. Auto dealers 
reported that trucks, SUVs, and crossovers continued to 
gain market share of passenger vehicles. Demand for 
nondurable goods ticked higher. Retailers with broad 
footprints noted that sales within the Fourth District were 
roughly in line with national sales. Inventories were at 
desired levels, but profit margins for nondurable goods 
narrowed modestly.   
Manufacturing 
Business conditions in manufacturing remained solid, 
although producers struggled with capacity constraints 
and input price increases. Demand was strong, but some 
contacts indicated that this demand was due to inventory 
stockpiling as fixed-price contracts approached renewal 
and as price increases were imminent. Import tariffs 
have had mixed effects: some manufacturers reported 
higher demand as import competition subsided, but 
others reported that tariffs led to input cost increases and 
supply chain gaps. The competition for skilled labor 
remained stiff, and two contacts reported off-schedule 
capital investments in labor-saving technologies to be 
able to keep up with strong demand without the need for 
additional personnel. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported that demand fell moderately and 
that they expect housing demand to soften in the near 
future. Homebuilders note that decreasing home afforda-
bility, because of rising construction costs and rising 
interest rates, drove this decrease in demand. Lower-
priced homes continued to outsell higher-priced homes. 
Real estate agents reported stable housing inventories.  
Business conditions improved modestly for nonresiden-
tial construction firms. Both private- and public-sector 
demand improved recently, with particular strength com-
ing from industrial and education customers. Backlogs 
remained strong and trended upward. Real estate devel-
opers were split about their characterizations of market 
conditions. Developers that experienced weaker market 
conditions cited closures of retail stores as leading to 
weaker demand. However, other developers noted sta-
ble or even slightly better demand because of strong 
business confidence.  
Financial Services 
Banking conditions were strong and steady. Demand for 
credit remained robust and came from both commercial 
and consumer segments. However, mortgage demand 
showed some signs of slowing and was held down by 
lack of housing inventory and by worries about rising 
interest rates. Most contacts reported that core deposits 
rose in response to higher interest rates, although some 
seasonal factors were at play as the holiday season 
approached. One contact noted that commercial depos-
its declined because clients invested cash in operations 
or equity markets rather than holding reserves.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms reported strong growth in 
business activity. Contacts cited strong business confi-
dence, driven by continued US economic growth, as 
underpinning their clients’ willingness to spend on busi-
ness advisory services. Contacts were split evenly be-
tween those that expected business conditions to im-
prove in the near future and those that expected them to 
be stable. In the transportation sector, demand in-
creased from an already high level. One railroad contact 
remarked that demand for her firm’s intermodal services 
was strong and that this was a sign that capacity was a 
constraint for trucking companies. There was some 
concern that seasonal patterns may be unusual this year 
as firms try to import goods before additional tariffs on 
Chinese goods take effect on January 1. Expectations 
for near-term business conditions in the transportation 
sector were stable. ■ 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate rate, overall. Manufacturers gave mixed reports as some firms re-
ported solid growth while others experienced lower demand and higher raw materials prices due to tariffs and some had 
lingering negative effects from the recent hurricanes. District ports saw robust activity, particularly for imports; however, 
officials were concerned that the threat of new tariffs boosted imports temporarily and volumes could drop off in the near 
future. Trucking demand slowed slightly but remained robust. Retail, travel, and tourism rose moderately as customer 
traffic and hotel bookings picked up in advance of the holiday season. Residential home sales increased modestly overall 
but varied considerably across markets. Real estate agents reported a decline in buyer traffic and a slight decline in 
prices for higher-priced homes. Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately for office, retail, and industrial markets. 
Lenders saw a modest increase in residential mortgage demand and stronger growth for commercial real estate loans. 
The demand for labor strengthened moderately, and wage increases remained modest across sectors. Price growth 
remained moderate, overall. However, input prices rose sharply and compressed firms’ profit margins.  
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand continued to strengthen moderately in 
recent weeks. Employment agencies noted an increase 
in seasonal hiring and expected to post more job open-
ings throughout the holiday season. One staffing agency 
reported strong demand for all positions and skill levels 
and stated that ‘recruitment is the hardest it has ever 
been.’ Staffing firms saw more companies offering per-
manent positions to temporary employees. Meanwhile, 
business owners had difficulty filling positions for IT 
professionals, accountants, technicians, construction 
workers, and front-line manufacturing workers. In addi-
tion, some firms said that the lack of qualified talent was 
becoming a constraint on their business. Wage increas-
es remained modest across sectors.  
Prices  
Since our previous Beige Book report, price growth 
increased but remained moderate, overall. According to 
our most recent surveys, manufacturer’s selling prices 
rose at a moderate rate while input prices rose sharply. 
Several firms commented that the strong dollar and 
tariffs continued to affect the availability and prices of 
raw materials. Service sector firms reported similar 
margin compression with moderate growth in prices 
received but a sharp increase in prices paid. Wholesale 
and retail services saw higher prices for goods affected 
by tariffs while businesses reported paying higher prices 
for business-to-business services and recruitment. Man-
ufacturers and services firms saw higher shipping costs, 
as well.  
Manufacturing 
Since our last report, Fifth District manufacturers gave 
mixed reports on demand. Tariffs were a significant 
concern noted by manufacturers, as they were believed 
to raise costs of raw materials, thereby raising prices and 
lowering demand. However, a cabinet manufacturer 
reported an uptick in business in recent weeks, as cus-
tomers rushed orders in anticipation of higher tariffs in 
the new year. Meanwhile, a Virginia food manufacturer 
reported higher-than-anticipated growth that left the 
company struggling to meet demand. Many manufactur-
ers continued to face high transportation costs. In addi-
tion, effects of Hurricanes Florence and Michael lin-
gered, as production had been shut down in places.  
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports saw robust business conditions. Ex-
port volume softened somewhat, but imports were strong 
across the District. One port handled record-breaking 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
volumes in October. Port contacts stated that import 
growth was largely driven by retail, particularly auto. 
Some expressed concerns that the growth was the 
result of companies trying to order before another round 
of tariffs, which could lead to weak activity in the coming 
months. The softening in exports was partially attributed 
to agricultural goods, which were reduced by hurricane 
damage and tariffs. A District airport saw strong growth 
in imports and exports and was increasing capacity. 
Demand for trucking remained strong, although firms 
noted a slight slowing of demand compared to the ex-
traordinarily high levels seen in the last year. Trucking 
firms saw improvements in hiring that allowed them to 
keep their trucks moving but were hesitant to invest in 
new trucks and equipment because of concerns about 
demand in the next year .  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Travel and tourism grew moderately since our last re-
port. Hotel occupancy and room rates remained strong 
and bookings were picking up going into the holiday 
season. However, rainy weather suppressed tourism 
somewhat by preventing outdoor activities and made 
travel more difficult. Labor issues were reported by 
some businesses, such as a Virginia resort that had to 
cut back on scheduled ski lessons because of a lack of 
instructors while other businesses reported shrinking 
profit margins as a result of wage increases. 
Fifth District retailers reported moderate growth, on 
balance, with strong demand and high customer traffic. 
A Virginia sporting goods store reported its best busi-
ness in several years. Meanwhile, a North Carolina auto 
dealer reported steady business overall but noted a 
slowdown in new car sales as customers chose low-cost 
used cars instead. Several retailers reported narrowing 
profit margins as cost of goods increased as a result of 
tariffs, and transportation costs remained high. Some 
retailers in the Carolinas have not made up business 
lost because of the hurricanes. And a Virginia produce 
retailer reported losing crops to the storms.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales increased modestly, overall, but the market 
was a little less consistent and buyer traffic slowed in 
recent weeks. Realtors attributed some of the slowdown 
to rising interest rates. Single-family home inventory 
remained low while average days on the market edged 
up in some locations. District home prices were report-
edly stable to increasing modestly. Meanwhile, new 
home construction slowed slightly. A Virginia Realtor 
reported fewer new home sales at two residential devel-
opments and stated that the builder added incentives on 
existing inventory to help increase sales.   
Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately in re-
cent weeks as brokers reported strong demand across 
office, retail, and industrial markets. Vacancy rates re-
mained low across markets, while rental rates were 
reportedly stable to increasing modestly. Commercial 
sales rose modestly, according to a few brokers, with 
industrial and retail building sites representing the major-
ity of transactions. A broker in Charlotte, North Carolina, 
said that the number of office building sales had in-
creased in recent weeks for both urban and suburban 
markets. Commercial construction increased modestly in 
some regions, which was mainly attributed to strong 
demand for warehouse and industrial space. Multifamily 
leasing remained healthy in most markets.  
Banking and Finance 
Since our previous Beige Book, loan demand grew mod-
estly. Overall, bankers said that demand for commercial 
real estate loans strengthened, while business and auto 
loan demand was unchanged. Meanwhile, residential 
mortgage demand grew at a modest pace. Deposit rates 
increased, and bank executives reported that competi-
tion for deposits remained aggressive. Credit quality 
remained stable and credit standards were generally 
unchanged. Interest rates for residential and commercial 
loans rose slightly in recent weeks.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services was little changed in 
recent weeks. Professional and business services firms 
gave mixed reports; some said that demand increased 
while others commented that labor constraints were 
holding back growth. Enrollments at community colleges 
fell due to a strong labor market. Meanwhile, accounting 
and legal services firms experienced moderate growth. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from Sixth District business contacts described economic conditions as expanding at a moderate pace since 
the previous report. The majority of contacts are optimistic and expect the pace to continue for the remainder of the 
year. The labor market remained tight amid increasing reports of wage pressures. Firms continued to note rising nonla-
bor costs, and several contacts indicated having the ability to pass along the increases. Retailers, including automobile 
dealers, cited slightly higher sales over the reporting period. Reports from the hospitality sector were positive across 
most parts of the District. Contacts reported that residential real estate market activity was subdued, though commercial 
real estate activity remained robust. Manufacturers reported robust levels of new orders and production. Bankers cited 
that financial conditions were steady since the previous report. 
Employment and Wages  
Broadly, employee retention efforts remained a dominant 
labor market theme among business contacts. Firms 
continued to engage in internal programs and marketing 
initiatives to promote culture, build loyalty, and create a 
positive environment for workers. Several business 
contacts, especially those searching for truck drivers, 
construction laborers, low-skill workers, and information 
technology professionals, continued to report that labor 
market tightening impeded their ability to grow. Contacts 
shared that driver shortages caused supply chain delays 
and negatively affected their ability to meet customers’ 
demands. Employers encountered some tightening for 
other positions and business areas, however some 
contacts expressed a willingness to wait for the right 
person rather than pay more, since they do not believe 
that higher pay will guarantee a higher quality worker. 
Hurricane Michael reduced employment among firms in 
northwest Florida, and several businesses have not 
returned to pre-hurricane employment levels.  
Overall, employers shared that wage increases rose at 
either the same or an increased pace compared with the 
previous year, around 3-4 percent on average. A number 
of contacts mentioned that recent announcements from 
large national firms to increase starting wages for work-
ers at the lower end of the pay scale have created broad 
pressures to raise pay for these workers across the 
region, particularly among hospitality and retail employ-
ers. Several contacts pointed out that overall compensa-
tion costs were expected to increase at a slightly faster 
pace in 2019.         
Prices  
Nonlabor costs continued to rise, according to reports 
from businesses across the District. Similar to the previ-
ous report, some price increases were noted as being 
passed along with no significant protest. Some contacts 
reported rising trucking rates and expressed concern 
that continued price escalations related to tariffs could 
impact future demand. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Infla-
tion Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit 
costs were up 2.2 percent in October. Survey respond-
ents indicated they expect unit costs to rise 2.3 percent 
over the next twelve months. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Since the previous report, District retailers indicated that 
sales levels rose slightly. The outlook among retailers 
regarding the upcoming holiday season was optimistic 
with contacts expecting higher sales levels than last 
year. Automobile dealers noted a slight increase in the 
momentum of auto sales.  
District tourism and hospitality contacts reported that 
domestic travel was strong while the pace of growth in 
group and convention travel softened since the last 
report. On balance, demand for hotel rooms in the Dis-
trict remained robust while room rates decreased. Con-
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
tacts were optimistic about demand in 2019 although 
they anticipate the pace of growth to slow.  
Construction and Real Estate 
On balance, housing activity continued to grow, albeit at 
a measured pace. Year-over-year new home sales in 
many District markets were up slightly, and existing 
home sales either moderated or declined as interest 
rates rose and inventory levels remained low. Upward 
pressure on home prices persisted but at a moderate 
pace. New home construction throughout the District 
continued to lag behind housing demand and was con-
centrated in higher price points within prime/high de-
mand submarkets. Homebuilders indicated that rising 
land, labor, and material costs continued to push new 
home prices higher.  
District commercial real estate activity remained strong 
across most of the region during the reporting period. 
Vacancy rates continued to decline modestly, though 
contacts reported some slower-paced leasing dynamics 
at some suburban retail properties. Industrial leasing 
was especially robust and generally was greater than the 
heightened amount of new construction completions 
across the District. Multifamily occupancy rates rose as 
demand outpaced supply.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts continued to report solid demand 
and healthy overall business conditions since the previ-
ous reporting period. New orders and production levels 
remained robust at most firms, with the exception of 
those along the Gulf Coast that were affected by Hurri-
cane Michael. Supply delivery times were reported to be 
getting slightly shorter, while input prices continued to 
rise. Expectations for future production levels increased 
from the previous period, with almost half of contacts 
expecting higher production over the next six months.   
Transportation 
District transportation contacts indicated that demand 
was generally consistent with the previous reporting 
period. Total rail traffic, including intermodal, was up 
marginally over year earlier levels. Trucking and logistics 
contacts reported continued growth in e-commerce 
shipments. District ports noted a strengthening in con-
tainer activity related to inventory building for the peak 
buying season, along with increases in breakbulk, auto-
motive, and heavy equipment cargo. While one District 
port in the path of Hurricane Michael experienced some 
operational disruptions, most transportation firms noted 
little to no negative impact on the movement of cargo 
due to the storm.  
 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions were stable. Earnings 
improved, driven by higher interest rates that enhanced 
the net interest margin at most institutions. Credit quality 
generally remained positive, however some District 
institutions experienced an increase in bankcard delin-
quencies. Financial institutions continued to loosen 
underwriting standards due to slowing demand for credit 
and increased competition, particularly in the residential 
mortgage and the commercial lending portfolios.   
Energy  
Overall, activity in the District’s energy sector picked up 
since the previous reporting period. Oil and gas produc-
tion continued to increase. Expenditures on power gen-
eration projects across the District continued to rise, 
largely attributed to increased industrial demand. Con-
tacts reported several recently initiated, approved, or 
planned capital projects across the region to expand 
capacity among chemical producers and power plants, 
and to construct oil and gas storage terminals and pipe-
lines for takeaway capacity to and from the Gulf Coast of 
Louisiana. Gulf of Mexico drilling rig shut-ins due to 
Hurricane Michael were described as minimal; contacts 
estimated the loss of crude oil production at approxi-
mately two million barrels or about $140 million.  
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District softened. In 
early October, Hurricane Michael caused significant wind 
and rain damage to agriculture production in the Florida 
panhandle, south Alabama, and south Georgia. Products 
affected included cotton, pecans, peanuts, fruit and 
specialty crops, timber, livestock, poultry, and green-
house and nursery products. In spite of Hurricane Mi-
chael, cotton harvesting in Alabama and Georgia pro-
gressed close to their five-year averages, but with signifi-
cant deterioration in conditions, especially in Georgia. 
The District’s soybean and peanut harvests were ahead 
of their five-year averages. Year-over-year prices paid to 
farmers in September were up for corn, cotton, rice, and 
beef, while soybean, eggs, and broiler prices were 
down.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District grew at a modest pace in October and early November, and contacts expected 
it to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Manufacturing production grew moderately; employment, con-
sumer spending, and business spending increased modestly; and construction and real estate activity decreased slight-
ly. Wages and prices rose modestly and financial conditions were little changed. Large corn and soybean yields led to 
some improvements in crop producers’ incomes. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth slowed to a modest pace over the 
reporting period, and contacts expected job gains to 
continue at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Hiring 
was focused on production, sales, and professional and 
technical workers, though there was a decline in the 
number of contacts planning to hire sales workers. As 
they have for some time, contacts indicated that the 
labor market was tight and that they had difficulty filling 
positions at all skill levels. A number of contacts said that 
they had been “ghosted,” a situation in which a worker 
stops coming to work without notice and then is impossi-
ble to contact. Wage growth picked up some but re-
mained modest overall. More contacts reported that they 
were increasing wages for select employees as opposed 
to raising wages across the board. Contacts were most 
likely to report wage increases for managerial, profes-
sional and technical, administrative, and production 
workers. Many firms reported rising benefits costs. 
Prices 
Prices rose modestly in October and early November, 
and contacts expected prices to continue to increase at 
that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail prices 
increased slightly overall. Producer prices again rose 
moderately, reflecting in part the pass-through of higher 
labor, materials, and freight costs. Energy costs declined 
some. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending picked up some over the reporting 
period, but growth remained modest on balance. Nonau-
to retail sales rose modestly, with gains in the home 
improvement, hardware, lawn and garden, furniture and 
appliance, and apparel sectors. Contacts expected good 
holiday sales this year. Light vehicle sales rose moder-
ately, with gains for both new and used vehicles. Some 
dealers indicated that generous discounts had noticeably 
boosted business fleet sales. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in October and 
early November. Retail contacts said that inventories 
were generally at comfortable levels. One contact noted 
that retailers were expecting good holiday sales and had 
increased inventories accordingly. Contacts also indicat-
ed that retailers were building up stock in anticipation of 
higher tariffs on Chinese imports that are set to take 
effect in 2019. Most manufacturing contacts also report-
ed stocks were at comfortable levels, though some indi-
cated that inventories were too low because of longer 
lead times for materials. Capital spending increased 
modestly, and contacts expected growth to continue at 
that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were 
primarily for replacing industrial and IT equipment and 
for renovating structures. There was also a notable 
increase in contacts reporting spending for M&A. De-
mand for energy from commercial and industrial users 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
increased modestly, with growth in manufacturing 
(particularly from steel producers) offsetting a slight 
decline in the commercial sector. Demand for transporta-
tion services was little changed, but remained at a strong 
level. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity decreased slightly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction de-
clined slightly, with growth in suburban single-family 
homebuilding offset by declines in other markets. Home 
sales also declined some. One contact attributed the 
slowdown to rising interest rates and low inventories for 
starter homes. Home prices and residential rents in-
creased slightly. Nonresidential construction was little 
changed overall, though one contact noted increased 
demand from the education sector. Commercial real 
estate activity was also little changed, though the pace 
remained strong. Contacts noted particularly strong 
demand for industrial space. Commercial rents edged 
higher and vacancy rates edged lower. The availability of 
sublease space increased marginally. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production continued at a mod-
erate rate in October and early November. Steel output 
rose moderately as end-user demand remained at a high 
level. Steel imports continued to decline. Demand for 
heavy machinery increased moderately as well, with 
growth led by the construction and energy sectors. One 
contact noted that supply chain constraints were holding 
back growth. Demand for heavy trucks remained strong. 
Order books for specialty metals manufacturers in-
creased modestly: Growth was spread across a wide 
variety of sectors, though contacts noted particularly 
strong demand from the aerospace sector. Auto produc-
tion was flat, but remained at a solid level. 
Banking and Finance 
Overall, financial conditions were little changed over the 
reporting period. Financial market participants noted the 
declines in equities prices and increased volatility. Busi-
ness loan demand increased modestly, with contacts 
reporting growth in the construction, manufacturing, 
transportation, and energy sectors. Loan quality and 
lending standards were little changed. Consumer loan 
demand was flat overall, though contacts noted a slight 
increase in demand for auto loans. Consumer loan quali-
ty and lending standards were also little changed. 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Although the harvest took longer than normal, corn and 
soybean yields were quite large. And, in spite of low 
prices, crop producers’ incomes were better than what 
had been expected earlier this year. However, crop sales 
were lower than normal, and a record amount of the 
harvest was put into storage. This reflected in part higher 
prices for delivery in later months compared to prices for 
delivery at harvest. Logistical challenges continued as 
soybeans that would usually be exported to China were 
being sent to other markets. Farm equipment dealers 
reported giving large discounts in order to make sales as 
many crop farmers continued to face financial challeng-
es. Hog and cattle prices moved higher during the re-
porting period, but milk prices floundered in part because 
of weak exports. Farm mediation services remained in 
demand for troubled operations. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have slightly improved since our previous report. Firms indicated modest growth in employment 
and wages. Wage increases were widespread and higher than previous years for the vast majority of firms. Similarly, 
price pressures have increased modestly since our previous report. Consumer spending activity improved slightly, alt-
hough auto sales showed little to no growth. Reports from manufacturing firms were upbeat; many firms reported strong 
orders and a positive outlook. Conversely, reports from bankers and real estate contacts were generally pessimistic, 
with these contacts reporting slight declines in activity. Overall, the outlook among all contacts continued to weaken but 
remains slightly optimistic for the upcoming year. On net, a slightly greater share of contacts expect economic condi-
tions in 2019 to be better or somewhat better than 2018. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has grown modestly since the previous 
reporting period. On net, 22 percent of business contacts 
surveyed reported that employment was higher or slight-
ly higher than a year ago. Approximately half of the 
contacts expected their firm to increase employment 
over the next year, and the remaining contacts expected 
employment to remain unchanged. Contacts ranked an 
inability to find candidates with the required skills as the 
single greatest factor restraining hiring. The labor market 
was especially tight in the manufacturing, construction, 
and transportation sectors. One contact reported that 
manufacturing firms were turning down new orders due 
to worker shortages. Firms, particularly small business-
es, continue to use nonwage benefits to attract employ-
ees. Staffing contacts in St. Louis reported that employ-
ees seem to have more leverage than employers for the 
first time in several years. 
Wages have moderately increased since the previous 
report. On net, 39 percent of survey respondents indicat-
ed that wages were higher or slightly higher than a year 
ago, and 30 percent reported increases in labor costs. 
Contacts reported that the tight labor market led to in-
creased pay for both new hires and existing employees: 
77 percent of firms reported raising wages and salaries 
by more than they did in the past few years. Additionally, 
raises for new hires at national retailers have pushed up 
starting wages. Small business wages increased mod-
estly in the St. Louis area and moderately in Tennessee. 
Prices  
Prices have increased modestly since the previous re-
port. On net, 27 percent of business contacts reported 
that prices charged to consumers increased relative to 
last year. Nonlabor costs for businesses also rose mod-
estly. On net, 33 percent of survey respondents held that 
costs were higher than the same time last year, which is 
unchanged from our survey three months ago. Metal 
prices, while remaining high in year-over-year terms, 
showed little change since the previous report. Agricul-
tural prices remain generally low, and decreased interna-
tional demand has increased the cost of using grain 
storage facilities as farmers seek to store, rather than to 
sell, their crops. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate that consumer spending has slightly in-
creased since our previous report. Real sales tax collec-
tions increased in Arkansas, Missouri, Tennessee, and 
Kentucky relative to a year ago. Reports from St. Louis 
auto dealers indicated that auto sales slightly increased, 
while Little Rock and Memphis auto dealers indicated 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
that auto sales were flat relative to a year ago. Auto 
dealers reported increased demand for new vehicles, but 
they also expressed concern over higher interest rates 
on new vehicle loans. Hospitality contacts in Missouri 
reported that sales were flat year over year. Arkansas 
tourism sales tax revenue slightly increased year over 
year. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased moderately since 
our previous report. A large majority of contacts reported 
that production, new orders, and capacity utilization 
increased. Several companies reported new capital 
expenditure and facility expansion plans, including firms 
that manufacture agricultural chemicals and window 
coverings. 
Contacts are also optimistic about the next quarter, with 
net majorities expecting increases in production, new 
orders, and capacity utilization. However, one contact in 
the chemicals sector is reporting that layoffs will take 
place between this quarter and the first quarter of 2019, 
and a few manufacturing contacts expressed concern 
that labor market tightness is contributing to a shortage 
of qualified employees.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has improved 
slightly since the previous report. Across the District, 
sales expectations were met. Compared with a year ago, 
68 percent of survey respondents noted higher sales and 
52 percent expect the next quarter also to be higher year 
over year. Local contacts note that barge activity has 
increased due to the large number of storage barges for 
soybeans affected by recent tariffs. National logistics 
firms continue to hire temporary workers due to higher 
seasonal demand. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity increased slightly. Sea-
sonally adjusted home sales for October increased 
slightly overall. Contacts continued to report inventory 
shortages; and, on net, about one-quarter of contacts 
reported that sales halfway through the fourth quarter 
have fallen short of expectations.  
Residential construction activity was mixed. October 
seasonally adjusted permit activity within District MSAs 
was modestly lower than one year ago. However, about 
36 percent of survey respondents, on net, reported an 
increase in residential construction relative to the same 
time last year, and the same fraction of respondents 
reported that they expect this trend to continue into the 
first quarter of 2019.  
Commercial real estate activity has decreased modestly 
since the previous report. Contacts reported a decrease 
in demand for most property types, particularly office and 
retail, and about 40 percent of respondents, on net, 
reported a decrease in multifamily demand in the current 
quarter. About 10 percent of respondents, on net, expect 
a slowdown in activity to continue into the first quarter of 
2019; however, respondents expect demand for retail 
space to pick up in the first quarter of 2019. 
Commercial construction activity has remained un-
changed since our previous report. There was a slight 
decrease in multifamily permit activity in most of the 
District’s major MSAs relative to the prior month, but 
local contacts in Little Rock reported that the market was 
strong and there was robust demand for construction. 
On net, one-third of contacts expressed an optimistic 
outlook going into the first quarter of 2019. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions have weakened slightly since the 
previous report. Loan demand for commercial and indus-
trial loans was unchanged relative to year-ago levels, 
while loan demand for mortgages slightly declined. 
Bankers expect stable demand growth overall into the 
first quarter of 2019. Credit standards overall tightened 
slightly relative to year-ago levels. Overall delinquencies 
remained relatively stable on a year-over-year basis, 
with only a slight increase for the final quarter of 2018. 
Commercial and industrial loan delinquencies are ex-
pected to remain unchanged in the first quarter of 2019. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions declined modestly from the 
previous reporting period. Corn, cotton, and soybean 
yields are expected to be higher than 2017 levels, while 
rice yields are expected to be lower. Contacts noted that 
unusually wet weather has impacted crop quality nega-
tively this fall, which contributed to a deterioration in crop 
prices. In addition, contacts expressed concern over the 
ongoing tariffs leveled at U.S. agricultural products. 
There are reports of storage shortages as soybeans that 
are normally exported to China are being stored in large 
quantities rather than exported.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined slightly 
from September to October, with seasonally adjusted 
production declining a little over 3 percent. October 
production increased 3 percent from a year ago. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity increased moderately since the previous report. Employment grew moderately, with 
hiring demand remaining robust, but a tight labor supply was restraining employment growth. Wage pressures were 
moderate overall, while price growth remained modest. The District economy showed growth in consumer spending, 
construction, residential real estate, manufacturing, and energy. Commercial real estate activity was mixed, while agri-
cultural conditions remained weak.    
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report. 
Hiring demand remained robust, but a tight labor supply 
was restraining employment growth. Job postings 
tracked by district states were higher overall in October 
compared with the same period a year earlier. Minnesota 
and North Dakota saw particularly strong growth in job 
postings, while South Dakota and the Upper Peninsula 
of Michigan had small declines. Ad hoc surveys of 
businesses in Minnesota, Montana, and South Dakota, 
conducted in late October and November by the 
Minneapolis Fed, found that a significant majority of 
respondents’ firms were hiring; many were hiring to both 
increase total headcount and replace turnover. 
Numerous construction contacts in Minneapolis-St. Paul 
said they were hiring, and most were looking to increase 
total headcount. However, tight labor availability was 
making it difficult for firms to find necessary workers. 
Surveys by the Minneapolis Fed found that labor 
availability was widely seen as the biggest obstacle to 
short-term growth. Unemployment insurance claims 
have also continued to drop; over the most recent six-
week period (through early November), both initial and 
continuing claims saw a cumulative decline of 12 percent 
across District states compared with the same period a 
year earlier. A Montana contact noted that seasonal 
layoffs for male-dominated industries like construction 
have been pushed back this year. “This hasn’t happened 
before in the years that we’ve been watching.”  
Wage pressures were moderate overall, with some 
evidence of stronger pressures for certain industries and 
worker skills. Several ad hoc surveys by the Minneapolis 
Fed showed wage increases coalescing around 3 
percent over the past 12 months. A small majority of 
Minnesota and South Dakota firms reported wage 
increases below 3 percent; however, a small majority of 
Montana firms reported increases above 3 percent, as 
did about 70 percent of Minneapolis-St. Paul 
construction firms. A Minnesota services company 
announced it was raising its base wage from $12 to $14 
per hour in hopes of hiring 300 people by year’s end. A 
tight labor market for high-tech skills in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul has led to double-digit wage increases for some 
information technology and other STEM positions over 
the past 12 months. There were also reports that more 
companies, especially those in construction trades, were 
picking up a greater share of workers’ health insurance 
premium costs to attract and retain employees. 
Prices  
Price Price growth remained generally modest since the 
previous report, though input prices saw more pressure. 
In a recent survey of large firms, about 30 percent saw 
input prices rise by 3 percent or more over the past 12 
months, but 41 percent believe they will rise by 3 percent 
or more over the coming 12 months. Several contacts 
reported notable increases in freight and transportation 
logistics prices. Retail fuel prices in District states as of 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018

I-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis  
late November were substantially lower than a month 
earlier. However, home heating costs were expected to 
increase faster in District states than nationally this 
winter, largely due to rises in the prices of heating oil and 
natural gas, as the average temperature forecast is 
roughly flat from last year. Prices received by farmers for 
corn, wheat, hay, and cattle increased in September 
compared with a year earlier; prices for soybeans, hogs, 
milk, chickens, eggs, and turkeys decreased.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending grew moderately since the last 
report. Taxable sales have seen strong growth in South 
Dakota this fall compared with a year earlier; Wisconsin 
also saw sales growth year over year, but at slower rates 
than those seen over summer months. In Minnesota, 
hotel demand rose, with higher occupancy and revenue 
per available room in October compared with a year 
earlier. Tourism activity was solid in Montana, with 
October visits to Glacier National Park seeing a 9 
percent increase. Total enplanements at Montana’s two 
largest airports were also up 9 percent over a year 
earlier. Attendance at national parks elsewhere in the 
District were mixed. Total visits in October were down at 
Mount Rushmore, as well as at Pictured Rocks in 
Michigan’s Upper Peninsula, and vehicle crossings at 
the U.P.’s Mackinac Bridge have been lower this fall 
compared with a year earlier.    
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction activity grew moderately since 
the last report. Industry data showed that total 
construction spending in October was higher across 
much of the District compared with a year earlier. 
Industry data showed that both new commercial projects 
and total active construction projects in the District as of 
early November were slightly higher than a year ago. 
However, there was also some evidence that the number 
of active projects may be elevated to some degree by 
the inability of construction firms to find available labor. 
Overall, commercial permitting in October was strong in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, but otherwise mixed among the 
District's other metro markets. Several industry contacts 
in Minneapolis-St. Paul said project pipelines were full 
heading into the end of the year and early part of 2019, 
and industrial and medical construction sectors were 
said to be strong. Another construction contact also 
noted significant activity in the energy segment in 
Minnesota. Residential construction activity saw 
moderate growth. October single-family permitting was 
higher in a notable majority of District metros compared 
with a year earlier, while multifamily permitting was 
mixed.  
Commercial real estate activity was mixed since the last 
report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, industrial and multifamily 
sectors both continued to show healthy leasing demand, 
with low vacancy rates despite significant new 
construction. However, both retail and office vacancy 
rates have been increasing. Several national retailers 
announced closures in Minnesota, and one specialty 
retailer announced the closure of eight stores in the 
state. Consumer shifts to online retailers have 
contributed to rising vacancy rates in retail space, but 
have also contributed to lower industrial vacancies due 
to increased leasing of industrial warehouse space in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul. Residential real estate activity rose 
moderately. Closed sales in October were mostly higher 
compared with a year earlier across most of the District. 
October home sales were particularly strong in western 
and northern counties of Wisconsin. Sales in Montana’s 
larger markets were mixed, but softer overall.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased modestly since 
the previous report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions indicated increased activity in October 
compared with a month earlier in Minnesota and the 
Dakotas. An industrial equipment producer announced a 
large expansion that would nearly double capacity at a 
plant in Minnesota. However, multiple contacts have 
reported putting capital spending plans on hold due to 
uncertainty in their outlooks.  
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak. According 
to results from the Minneapolis Fed’s third-quarter 
survey of agricultural credit conditions, roughly three in 
five lenders surveyed reported that farm incomes 
decreased in the third quarter relative to a year earlier, 
while a similar proportion reported decreased capital 
spending. While early indications were for very strong 
production in much of the District, in some areas heavy 
rains and unseasonably cold weather were complicating 
harvests. District oil and gas exploration activity as of 
late November increased moderately relative to the last 
report. North Dakota oil production increased to a new 
record in September. A major natural gas processing 
plant began operations in North Dakota. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity increased slightly in late October and November and remained modestly above year-
ago levels. Consumer spending was fairly flat as gains in retail and auto sales were offset by declines in restaurant and 
tourism activity. Manufacturing activity continued to expand moderately in both durable and non-durable goods plants. 
Sales rose at a modest-to-moderate pace in the professional and high-tech, wholesale trade, and transportation sectors, 
and additional gains were expected in the months ahead. Residential real estate sales declined modestly and residen-
tial construction activity held steady, while overall activity in the commercial real estate sector increased. Energy activity 
expanded, but the outlook was mixed due in part to geopolitical uncertainty. The agricultural outlook remained weak, 
with lower soybean prices, weakness in dairy and hog markets, deteriorating farm income, and uncertainty surrounding 
international trade. Employment and employee hours edged up across most industries, and about half of contacts ex-
pected to increase employment in the next twelve months due primarily to strong sales growth and overworked staff. 
Wage growth expanded modestly, and additional gains were expected. Prices continued to rise, with gains in input 
prices slightly outpacing those of selling prices.   
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment and employee hours edged up in 
late October and November across the District, and 
expectations were for modest gains in the months 
ahead. Contacts in the retail trade, wholesale trade, auto 
sales, real estate, professional services, health services, 
and manufacturing sectors noted flat-to-modestly higher 
employment, while those in the transportation, restau-
rant, and tourism sectors reported a decline. The same 
sectors reporting an increase in employment, with the 
addition of transportation, also noted rising employee 
hours. About half of respondents expected employment 
to increase at their firm over the next twelve months, 
while the majority of the remaining respondents antici-
pated unchanged levels of employment. Those who 
projected increased employment levels cited expecta-
tions for strong sales growth and currently overworked 
staff as the primary reasons.  
A majority of respondents continued to note labor short-
ages for low- and medium-skill workers, including posi-
tions for retail sales, commercial drivers, specialized IT, 
construction, and restaurant staff. Wages grew modestly 
since the previous survey, and most contacts reported 
higher starting wages for new hires. Wages were ex-
pected to increase at a similar pace moving forward.  
   
Prices  
Input and selling prices continued to rise in late October 
and November, with the pace of gains in input prices 
slightly exceeding the growth of selling prices on aver-
age. In the retail sector, however, both input and selling 
prices grew moderately, and additional gains were ex-
pected in the months ahead. Respondents in the trans-
portation and restaurant sectors reported modest growth 
in selling and input prices since the previous survey 
period, and both were well above year-ago levels. Mod-
erate gains were anticipated for input prices in the res-
taurant and transportation sector, while modest growth 
was expected for selling prices moving forward. Manu-
facturers continued to report modest price growth for 
finished products and moderately higher prices for raw 
materials. Raw material prices were projected to in-
crease moderately in the months ahead, while prices for 
finished products were projected to rise modestly.   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was fairly flat compared to the 
previous survey period, however contacts expected 
modest increases in the coming months driven by pro-
jected gains in the retail and auto sectors. Retail sales 
rose slightly and remained well above year-ago levels. 
Retail sales and inventory levels were anticipated to 
increase moderately in the next few months. Auto sales 
inched up compared to the previous survey period, and 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
contacts expected both sales and inventories to rise 
modestly in the coming months. Respondents noted 
SUVs and trucks sold well, whereas sedans sold poorly. 
Restaurant sales continued to fall modestly, though they 
remained well above year-ago levels. Restaurant con-
tacts anticipated sales to continue to decline slightly in 
the coming months. Tourism activity also fell modestly 
since the previous survey period.    
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moder-
ate pace, and other business contacts experienced 
modest-to-moderate sales growth. Factory activity grew 
at both durable and nondurable goods plants due primar-
ily to increases in metals, aircraft, food, and plastics. The 
levels of production, shipments, and new orders in-
creased modestly since the previous survey period, and 
each remained higher than year-ago levels. Manufactur-
ers expected modest increases in capital expenditures in 
the coming months.  
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the wholesale trade 
and transportation sectors experienced moderate sales 
growth, and professional and high-tech firms reported 
modest sales growth. Transportation contacts expected 
modest growth in the coming months, whereas whole-
sale trade and professional and high-tech contacts pro-
jected strong growth. Wholesale trade and professional 
and high-tech firms anticipated capital expenditures to 
increase modestly moving forward, while transportation 
firms expected capital spending to rise slightly.   
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity was mixed as residential real 
estate activity edged down and commercial real estate 
activity rose. Residential home sales declined modestly 
since the previous survey period, while home prices and 
inventories continued to rise. Residential real estate 
contacts expected steady residential home sales and 
modest increases in selling prices and inventories in the 
months ahead. Sales of low- and medium-priced homes 
continued to outpace sales of higher-priced homes. 
Overall residential construction activity was flat since the 
previous survey period, and expectations were for no 
change moving forward. Activity in the commercial real 
estate sector increased slightly as sales and prices rose; 
absorption, construction underway, and completions 
were flat; and vacancy rates fell. Commercial real estate 
contacts expected slight growth in overall activity in the 
months ahead.     
 
 
Banking 
Bankers reported steady overall loan demand compared 
to the previous survey period. Specifically, respondents 
reported a slight increase in demand for commercial real 
estate loans, while the demand for commercial and 
industrial loans, residential real estate, consumer install-
ment, and agricultural loans fell. Bankers indicated loan 
quality improved slightly compared to a year ago and 
expected no change in loan quality over the next six 
months. Credit standards remained largely unchanged in 
all major loan categories. Overall, bankers reported a 
slight increase in deposit levels.    
Energy 
Energy activity expanded since the last survey period as 
production continued to grow, although expectations for 
future activity were mixed. The number of active oil rigs 
increased moderately, and the number of active gas rigs 
inched higher. Oil prices fell in November after rising 
earlier in the year. Expectations are for continued pro-
duction growth for crude oil in addition to supply increas-
es for natural gas. International geopolitical discussions 
surrounding waning OPEC production and U.S. sanc-
tions on Saudi Arabia may affect District energy prices 
and production expectations moving forward.   
Agriculture 
Farm income and credit conditions in the Tenth District 
weakened slightly from the last reporting period. Corn, 
wheat and cattle prices rose slightly. However, weak-
ness in hog and dairy markets, significantly lower soy-
bean prices, and trade uncertainty weighed on the agri-
cultural outlook in the District. Expectations for farm 
income were lowest in Missouri and Nebraska, which are 
more concentrated in soybean production than other 
states in the District. Alongside lower farm income, re-
payment rates declined slightly and demand for farm 
loans increased modestly. In addition, producers’ work-
ing capital deteriorated moderately, and the share of 
farm borrowers planning to sell mid- to long-term assets 
increased from a year ago. Despite downward pressure 
from a weaker farm economy and modest increases in 
farm loan interest rates, farmland values decreased only 
slightly.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Expansion in the Eleventh District economy slowed to a moderate pace during the reporting period. A broad-based 
deceleration was seen across the manufacturing and retail sectors and in loan volume growth. Home sales were soft 
partly due to tight inventories and rising mortgage rates. Conversely, drilling activity increased and ample rainfall boost-
ed crop conditions. Employment expanded, despite widespread labor shortages. Wage pressures were strong, and 
tariffs drove up input costs. Outlooks were less optimistic than the previous report due to increased uncertainty arising 
from trade disputes, rising interest rates, labor market constraints, and postelection politics. 
Employment and Wages  
Widespread job growth continued, despite tight labor 
markets. Labor shortages remained pervasive across 
industries and skill sets but were the most severe for mid
-skilled positions such as truck drivers and blue-collar 
workers in manufacturing, construction, and energy. 
Most companies said they were struggling to find quali-
fied workers, and many noted settling for less-qualified 
candidates to fill vacancies. 
Upward wage pressures remained strong and prevalent, 
although they did ease somewhat in manufacturing. 
Many firms noted raising wages to recruit and retain 
workers, and also using non-wage-based incentives 
such as better benefits, improved working conditions, 
and bonuses. A staffing firm said it had become difficult 
to hire for positions paying less than $15 an hour in 
Dallas–Fort Worth following Amazon’s announcement to 
raise its minimum wage. A manufacturing equipment 
supplier reported frequently raising wages to prevent its 
employees from being poached by other firms, and one 
contact noted high employee turnover despite paying 
their groundskeepers $20 an hour. 
Prices 
Input price pressures remained elevated in part due to 
tariffs, particularly in manufacturing and construction, 
and firms were struggling to pass these higher costs 
onto customers. Input and selling price pressures eased 
in retail, while pricing pressures in other service sectors 
were largely unchanged. Natural gas prices rose since 
the last report, while West Texas Intermediate crude oil 
prices fell from their recent highs. Fuel prices dropped 
even further, hurting refiners’ margins. 
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector slowed during the 
reporting period, and outlooks were less optimistic than 
they have been all year. Output growth softened notably 
in November, with the tariffs, labor constraints, and trade 
policy uncertainty cited as damping factors. The slowing 
was broad based but most pronounced in fabricated 
metals, construction related products, computer and 
electronics, and food manufacturing. The Gulf Coast 
refinery utilization rate remained high, while chemical 
production flattened during the reporting period. Out-
looks among downstream energy firms stayed optimistic, 
although petrochemical companies were experiencing 
margin compression from higher costs. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales expanded at a slower pace compared with 
the previous reporting period. Online sales grew modest-
ly as did motor vehicle sales, but some auto dealers said 
rising interest rates were shrinking margins. Sales at 
stores located along the Texas/Mexico border worsened 
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
partly due to weakness in the peso/dollar exchange rate, 
and building material and garden equipment suppliers 
noted flat activity. Retailers’ outlooks were less positive 
than the last report as tariffs and rising interest rates 
negatively impacted expectations. 
Nonfinancial Services 
The nonfinancial services sector expanded broadly, with 
revenue growth firming up among healthcare, infor-
mation services, and accommodation and food services 
firms. Demand for staffing services generally remained 
brisk and broad based, with particular strength noted in 
orders for healthcare staff, oilfield services labor, and 
blue-collar workers such as electricians, welders, and 
plumbers. Activity in the transportation services sector 
was solid. Courier and air cargo volumes expanded. Rail 
traffic stayed strong across most business lines, outside 
of a decline in building products shipments that was 
driven partly by a slowing housing market. Airlines said 
passenger demand remained stable and continued 
strength was expected in domestic air travel. Revenue 
growth was lackluster among professional, scientific, and 
technical services firms. Contacts were less optimistic in 
part due to uncertainty stemming from trade issues and 
politics. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market was soft over the reporting 
period as the recent rains and rising interest rates affect-
ed traffic and sales activity. Still, sales of moderately 
priced homes mostly remained solid. The wet weather 
also delayed lot development and homebuilding activity. 
Home prices were flat to up, and contacts noted usual 
year-end discounting. Outlooks remained positive, alt-
hough there is increased trepidation about the impact of 
rising mortgage rates and/or high construction costs on 
future sales. 
Conditions were little changed in the apartment market, 
and contacts noted some supply-driven softness at the 
high-end (prime Class A properties). Investor interest in 
multifamily properties was high, particularly in Austin and 
Houston. Industrial and retail markets generally re-
mained healthy. 
Financial Services 
Growth in loan volumes moderated over the reporting 
period. The deceleration was broad based across cate-
gories, including commercial and industrial, commercial 
real estate, and residential real estate. Consumer loan 
volume growth held steady. The cost of funds and loan 
pricing rose further, and many contacts noted that loan 
pricing remained very competitive. Deposit volumes 
expanded, albeit at a slower rate. Despite the slowing in 
loan growth, outlooks remained optimistic. 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District increased, but the 
number of new wells brought into production in the Per-
mian Basin continued to lag due to ongoing pipeline and 
transportation capacity constraints. The completion of a 
new pipeline project ahead of schedule has narrowed 
the spread between in-basin and West Texas Intermedi-
ate crude oil prices. Margins of oilfield services firms 
continued to be pressured by high costs and increased 
competition. Conversely, growing supplies of local sand 
and improvements in operational efficiency supported 
producers’ margins. Overall, outlooks remained positive. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions improved further, with less than 
one percent of the state in drought as of mid-November. 
Ample rainfall has built up ground moisture reserves, 
boosting crop prospects for 2019. However, excessive 
precipitation in some areas has delayed planting of the 
winter wheat crop and caused some quality issues for 
cotton. Overall, agricultural producers were quite opti-
mistic, although some continued to experience financial 
difficulty from drought conditions earlier in the year. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of early 
October through mid-November. Conditions in the labor market tightened further, and wage growth was moderate. Price 
inflation increased moderately. Sales of retail goods expanded somewhat, while activity in consumer and business 
services was solid. Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened, and conditions in agriculture improved modest-
ly. On balance, contacts reported that residential and commercial real estate market activity expanded at a solid pace. 
Lending activity ticked down modestly.  
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market tightened further. Across 
the District, contacts reported an increase in competition 
for workers and a shrinking pool of qualified applicants. 
A major shipping and logistics business in Northern 
California revised upwards plans to hire seasonal work-
ers and expected to convert more seasonal hires to 
permanent employees than in the past. Contacts contin-
ued to note shortages of construction workers, even as 
the real estate market cooled somewhat in some parts of 
the District. A contact in the business services sector in 
Washington observed increased competition from other 
sectors for skilled accounting and information technology 
professionals that are in short supply across the state. A 
few contacts in the banking and agriculture industries in 
California slowed their pace of hiring due to productivity-
enhancing investments.   
Wage growth continued to increase moderately across 
skill levels and industries. Nonwage compensation also 
increased at several businesses, often in the form of 
additional paid vacation days. Many contacts reported 
that turnover was up noticeably, causing labor costs to 
rise more than anticipated, as new hires negotiated 
higher starting wages. A contact in Northern California 
reported that salaries for software engineers continued 
to increase noticeably. An airline company in the Moun-
tain West noted moderate increases in starting salaries 
for pilots.  
Prices  
Price inflation increased moderately over the reporting 
period. Contacts reported a moderate pickup in the pace 
of price increases at retailers and quick service restau-
rant chains, partly due to rising labor costs at these 
businesses. Businesses in the shipping and logistics 
industry planned to apply holiday surcharges due to high 
freight volumes and previous increases in energy costs. 
A contact in the steel industry was able to increase sell-
ing prices modestly due in part to reduced global compe-
tition. A contact reported that some businesses in light 
manufacturing that source input materials from China 
faced higher production costs. Potato prices were down 
modestly due to supply outpacing demand after a strong 
harvest.          
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods expanded somewhat over the re-
porting period. A contact in Arizona noted strong con-
sumer demand in the region, which drove retail sales 
noticeably higher compared to this time last year. A 
contact in the Mountain West noted that consumers have 
begun to tend to purchase their lower-cost, basic goods 
online and higher-cost, luxury items in stores, straining 
brick and mortar establishments that sell everyday prod-
ucts. A major quick service restaurant chain based in 
Washington reported that in-store traffic continued to 
trend downward at a gradual pace.   
The Beige Book ■ November 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
On balance, holiday sales are expected to increase 
moderately relative to last year’s season, due in part to 
solid momentum in consumer confidence and spending. 
In the shipping and logistics industry, rising volumes in 
the past month have led some contacts to expect a 
robust holiday shopping season. One contact pointed to 
last year’s income tax changes as a driver of a more 
optimistic outlook for holiday spending. However, anoth-
er was attentive to the negative impact that the recent 
stock market declines could have on spending.   
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
was solid. A contact in the shipping and logistics industry 
reported a further increase in demand for freight services 
and brisk competition in the industry. A contact in North-
ern California observed strong demand for software 
products to address cybersecurity threats and to en-
hance business productivity. Demand from leisure 
guests in the hospitality industry was solid, while near-
term business reservations declined further.    
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened. 
Contacts in the steel industry reported that capacity 
utilization remained stable at an elevated level despite a 
tick down in sales to automakers and builders. Solid 
domestic demand from other sectors and beneficial trade 
policy developments helped to bolster the industry. Con-
tacts in Northern California observed that new orders of 
semiconductors were strong, input materials were readily 
available, and inventory levels were healthy. Deliveries 
of commercial aircraft increased slightly from the same 
period last year, while new orders grew significantly.   
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector improved modestly. 
Profits at beef and pork producers rose noticeably on a 
year-over-year basis, due to strong domestic demand. A 
contact in Central California reported that yields were 
generally solid but that trade policy uncertainty continued 
to limit the ability of growers to secure longer-term sales 
contracts. Potato and wheat yields in the Mountain West 
were strong, though exports of these products declined 
moderately. Drier-than-usual conditions in parts of Cali-
fornia lowered yields for select crops, like nuts and toma-
toes, but contacts noted that inventories were at an 
adequate level to meet demand.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets continued to expand at a 
solid pace, though many contacts observed that the 
pace of expansion has moderated somewhat in recent 
months. Residential construction was mixed. In the 
Mountain West and California, contacts observed gener-
ally solid construction activity and a shift into multifamily 
construction from single family in certain regions. Con-
tacts in the Pacific Northwest reported that building 
slowed somewhat, citing expectations of weaker demand 
due to rising mortgage rates as one factor restraining 
new projects. In most of the District, home prices and 
rents decelerated modestly, though prices were still high 
by historical standards, supported by continued elevated 
demand. Contacts noted slightly more positive develop-
ments in the commercial real estate market. A contact in 
Northern California observed solid leasing demand from 
businesses, in some cases resulting in rents above 
advertised rates. Contacts were generally hesitant to 
interpret any recent moderation in real estate activity as 
a definite shift in the trajectory of the market.   
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked down modestly over the reporting 
period. Growth in loan demand slowed modestly overall, 
with several contacts attributing most of the slowdown to 
higher interest rates. Net interest margins were flat to 
down slightly. Activity in the venture capital market was 
strong and equity valuations remained elevated despite 
some recent corrections. Credit quality continued to be 
healthy. ■ 


