The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
October 16, 2019 
October 2019 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
based on information collected on or before October 7, 2019. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
The U.S. economy expanded at a slight to modest pace since the prior report as business activity varied across the 
country. Reports from Districts representing states in the southern and western U.S. generally were more upbeat than 
Districts representing the Midwest and Great Plains. Household spending was solid on balance: nonauto retail sales 
increased modestly, while light vehicle sales were generally robust. Tourism and travel-related spending was up mod-
estly. Housing market conditions changed little. On the business spending side, nonresidential construction increased 
at a slightly slower yet still modest pace, while leasing activity advanced at a slow but steady rate. Manufacturing activi-
ty continued to edge lower. Contacts in some Districts suggested that persistent trade tensions and slower global 
growth weighed on activity. The early impact of a recent auto strike was limited. Freight shipments stabilized after 
falling during the previous reporting period. Bankers in many Districts reported moderately rising loan volumes, while 
activity in nonfinancial services increased solidly. Agricultural conditions deteriorated further due to the ongoing impacts 
of adverse weather, weak commodity prices, and trade disruptions. Business contacts mostly expect the economic 
expansion to continue; however, many lowered their outlooks for growth in the coming 6 to 12 months. 
Employment and Wages 
On balance, employment rose slightly amid reports of persistent worker shortages. Labor market tightness across skill 
levels and occupations was widely cited as a factor restraining hiring. Districts often reported relatively stronger de-
mand for workers in the professional services and information technology industries. By contrast, hiring in freight and 
manufacturing was weak. A number of Districts reported that manufacturers reduced their headcounts because orders 
were soft. However, some firms were more concerned about the longer-term availability of workers and subsequently 
chose to reduce hours rather than staff levels. Wages rose moderately in most Districts, with upward pressure noted for 
lower-skill workers in the retail and hospitality industries and for higher-skill professional and technical workers. A num-
ber of smaller firms reported difficulty matching pay offers from larger firms. Broadly, employers continued to use non-
wage approaches such as bonuses and benefits to attract and retain talent. 
Prices 
Most Districts characterized the recent pace of price increases as modest. Both retailers and manufacturers noted 
rising input costs, often for items subject to new tariffs, but retailers had relatively more success passing through these 
cost increases to their customers. Despite a recent increase in fuel costs, some reports suggested that shipping rates 
remained lower than they were earlier this year because of excess capacity in the industry. 
Boston 
Signs of slowing have become more widespread in re-
cent weeks, although software and IT services firms re-
ported results that exceeded expectations and real es-
tate markets have not weakened. Outlooks have sof-
tened; contacts attribute some of the softening to in-
creased uncertainty, not poorer current results.  
 
New York 
Regional economic growth slowed to a subdued pace. 
Job creation remained sluggish, largely reflecting a 
shortage of available workers, as labor markets re-
mained very tight and wage growth picked up. Prices 
continued to rise modestly. Service sector activity weak-
ened noticeably, and real estate markets softened some-
what. 
 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
On balance, business activity continued at a modest 
pace of growth during the current Beige Book period. 
Further labor market tightening caused “acute pressure,” 
described as increased hiring difficulty, constrained 
growth, and higher wages. Still, wages grew moderately 
and prices rose modestly overall. Most firms expressed a 
positive outlook, with ongoing caution amid heightened 
uncertainty. 
Cleveland 
District activity was stable on balance. Professional and 
business services, auto sales, and home sales rose 
while residential construction and freight fell. Manufactur-
ing activity stabilized after a couple periods of decline. 
Employment was stable overall, though there were some 
scattered reports of softening. Wages increased modest-
ly because of tight labor markets. Selling prices rose 
modestly. 
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy continued to grow at a mod-
est rate. Manufacturers saw declines in shipments and 
new orders; however, port and trucking activity rose. Re-
tail, tourism, and nonfinancial service firms generally ex-
perienced slight to moderate growth. Residential and 
commercial real estate sales, leasing, and construction 
picked up, overall. Labor markets remained tight. Wages 
and prices rose moderately.  
Atlanta 
The economy expanded at a modest pace. Labor mar-
kets remained tight, and reports of wage pressures were 
more widespread among low-skilled positions. Nonlabor 
input costs rose for some contacts. Overall retail sales 
were mixed. Residential real estate activity improved, 
while nonresidential activity was stable. Manufacturing 
activity rebounded since the previous report.  
Chicago 
Economic activity increased slightly overall. Employ-
ment, consumer spending, business spending, and con-
struction and real estate all increased slightly. Manufac-
turing production declined a bit. Wages and prices rose 
slightly and financial conditions improved modestly. The 
crop harvest got off to a slow start, as rains delayed 
fieldwork. 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have improved slightly since the 
previous report. Contacts from multiple industries noted 
a heightened sense of economic uncertainty. Consumer 
spending activity ticked up. Local bankers reported 
growth in outstanding loan volumes. However, manufac-
turing activity contracted slightly, and row crop produc-
tion levels are expected to be well below 2018 levels. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District activity grew at a slight pace. Employment 
was flat. Labor demand remained healthy with some 
signs of softness. Manufacturing activity decreased 
slightly, with some contacts expecting a further slow-
down in the final quarter of 2019. Consumer spending 
was mixed, but late-summer tourism was solid. Commer-
cial construction and real estate increased, but residen-
tial was mixed. Oil drilling increased slightly. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity expanded slightly in late August and 
September. Consumer spending rose modestly, and 
sales in the transportation, professional and high-tech 
services, and wholesale trade sectors were solid. Real 
estate activity increased, but residential construction ac-
tivity slowed. However, energy and manufacturing activ-
ity declined, and agricultural conditions remained weak.  
Dallas 
Economic activity continued to expand moderately. En-
ergy activity declined, but growth remained solid in man-
ufacturing and services. Home sales increased and loan 
demand accelerated. Selling prices were largely flat, as 
firms’ ability to pass through cost increases remained 
limited. Hiring continued at a steady pace. Outlooks were 
mixed and uncertainty remained elevated. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded at a 
modest pace. The labor market remained tight, and 
wage growth was moderate. Reports on price inflation 
were mixed. Sales of retail goods increased modestly, 
and consumer and business services activity expanded 
slightly. The pace of commerce in the manufacturing 
sector was little changed, and the agriculture sector 
slowed further. Activity in residential and commercial real 
estate markets was solid, and lending grew further.  
 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity showed signs of slowing in the First District. Retail results were mixed, while restaurants and tourism 
contacts cited recent signs of softening. Few manufacturers provided positive reports. By contrast, software and infor-
mation technology services firms said revenues were up, some strongly. Commercial real estate activity remained 
strong in the Boston and Portland metro areas and picked up in Providence. Housing prices across the region continued 
to rise. Except for software and IT services, most responding firms had downgraded their outlooks since the last round.  
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets remained tight even as a couple of firms 
began layoffs. Retailers said the labor market was tight. 
Among manufacturers, however, no contact reported in-
creasing headcount and two – which supply industrial 
customers – reported significant layoffs, about 5 percent 
of their staff. One also instituted furloughs and shortened 
workweeks; another respondent reported a marked in-
crease in unsolicited resumes for skilled machinists. By 
contrast, two manufacturing contacts reported that they 
still have difficulty finding qualified employees. Software 
and IT services contacts indicated that while headcount 
and turnover were largely unchanged, most planned to 
hire more front-facing sales roles in addition to technical 
and R&D staff.  
Prices  
Diverse influences across markets led to varied price 
pressures. Retailers reported prices were fairly steady 
while Massachusetts restaurants cited an average 3 per-
cent increase in menu prices year-over-year. Manufac-
turers indicated that price changes were mixed. On one 
hand, declines in activity have reduced pricing pressure. 
Two contacts noted significant drops in paper and pulp 
pricing due to reduced demand from China. Three con-
tacts said that price and availability of trucking services 
improved considerably since last year. On the other 
hand, tariffs have raised costs for several manufacturers. 
A producer of frozen fish said that tariffs had driven up  
prices. Software and IT services respondents reported 
no price increases and no plans to raise prices in the 
near future.  
Retail and Tourism 
Responding retailers reported sales ranging from down 
about 6 percent to up about 2 percent year-over-year; 
the outlook was less optimistic than in the last few 
rounds. One retailer noted that while the upcoming holi-
day season may provide a boost, expectations were that 
sales growth for 2019 and into 2020 would be pretty flat.  
Massachusetts restaurant sales were up 5.5 percent for 
the year ending June 30. Much of the overall increase 
was driven by sales in the last half of 2018. The slower 
first-half trend continued into July and August, as sales 
in both months were down year-over-year. A surge in 
home delivery services reportedly ate into restaurant 
profit margins already under pressure from ongoing in-
creases in operating costs and more competition from an 
over-supply of restaurants relative to the customer base. 
These factors combined to make the outlook uncertain.  
Cape Cod had an unexpectedly challenging summer 
tourist season. Bookings for overnight accommodations 
were down, though day travel to the Cape was up, 
judged by an increase in passenger traffic on the bridges 
and weekend train service. One theory was that the 
strong US dollar prompted more Americans to vacation 
abroad this summer. Media attention was “overly” fo-
cused on increased shark sightings and (rare) tornados. 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
 
 
Autumn business on Cape Cod was shaping up to be 
good, but a contact worried that tourism may be entering 
a slower pattern compared to 2017 and 2018, when 
tourist activity reached historic highs. 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Reports from manufacturers were mostly negative. Four 
of the seven respondents reported lower sales versus 
the same period last year, two reported flat sales and 
only one firm, a defense contractor, reported higher 
sales. Several contacts attributed declines to trade is-
sues; a manufacturer of filtration membranes said that 
chip manufacturers were delaying new plant construction 
due to uncertainty about trade policy. The farm-sector re-
cession reduced demand for heavy equipment.  
No contacts reported positive revisions to capital spend-
ing plans and two reported significant cuts. An industrial 
supplier planned to cut capital expenditures versus last 
year by as much as 25 percent versus a previously-
planned 5 percent increase.  
Five of seven contacts reported downward revisions to 
their 2020 outlook. Three of those remained positive but 
less positive than earlier. One industrial firm expected a 
recovery to start in the second half of 2020. Several 
compared now to 2015 when industrial demand slowed 
markedly but the economy as a whole did not. 
Software and Information Technology Services 
Growth in demand in the past quarter exceeded expec-
tations for the majority of New England software and IT 
services sector respondents. All three contacts experi-
enced positive demand growth. Two noted that market 
interest in subscription and cloud-based offerings had 
picked up month-to-month. Revenue growth remained 
positive and ranged from 2 percent to 24 percent year-
over-year. For most firms, capital expenditures were un-
changed, but one mentioned considering a switch from 
housing their own servers to migrating their operations 
onto the cloud, which would significantly change the 
structure of their capital expenses. All in all, contacts 
were upbeat in light of a third quarter that exceeded 
expectations, but many remained wary of political and 
macroeconomic uncertainty in the longer-term.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District contin-
ued to strengthen overall, but with inconsistencies in 
performance across geographic submarkets. Boston’s 
leasing market continued to be strong as all contacts de-
scribed low vacancy and high absorption. Asking rents in 
prime Boston locations increased by 20 percent in the 
last 9 to 12 months according to one contact. Construc-
tion activity in Boston was robust. The investment sales 
market in Boston was also strong, with high loan volume 
and low interest rates. In the Greater Portland area, both 
construction and leasing activity in office, industrial, and 
retail markets were up. In the leasing market, vacancies 
were low and the average rent rose about 5 percent over 
the past year. The investment sales market was also 
strong. The outlook remained positive for Boston and 
was optimistic for Portland. 
In the Providence area, the office leasing market picked 
up as the summer season ended, but demand still re-
mained tepid. Demand for buying industrial buildings 
was strong, but supply was limited. As a result, office 
rents increased moderately, while industrial rents rose 
faster. Market activity was expected to grow in October 
and early November. Transaction volume in the Provi-
dence investment sales market was limited. According to 
a contact, people were hesitant to commit to new con-
struction and investment projects because of uncertainty 
about the next recession. In Greater Hartford, leasing 
activity as well as construction activity stayed low. The 
industrial leasing market flattened as companies gave up 
space, and the investment sales market slowed slightly. 
The outlook for Connecticut was less upbeat than out-
looks for other New England states. 
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District contin-
ued to moderate in August. For single family homes, 
closed sales decreased moderately from August 2018 to 
August 2019 in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Boston, 
and New Hampshire. Median sales prices rose in all four 
reporting areas. Massachusetts, Boston, and New 
Hampshire experienced double-digit drops in inventory. 
For condos, sales were down in Massachusetts, Boston, 
and New Hampshire and up in Rhode Island. Median 
sales prices for condos were up in all reporting areas but 
Boston. Vermont and Maine – reporting combined statis-
tics for single family homes and condos – cited moderate 
price increases, slight drops in closed sales in Vermont, 
and modest sales increases in Maine.  
The ongoing shortage of active listings drew attention 
from many respondents. According to the Rhode Island 
contact, “Regardless of what happens to interest rates 
over the next year, we can’t sell what we don’t have 
available for sale.” ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional‐economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in the Second District economy was subdued in the latest reporting period. The labor market remained very 
tight, as employment levels were flat, and wage growth picked up slightly. Input price pressures have remained moder-
ate, while selling prices have risen modestly. Manufacturing activity was up marginally, and transportation business 
rebounded, while business was reported to be weaker in most service industries. Business contacts generally ex-
pressed considerably less optimism about the near-term outlook. Consumer spending was mixed, with strength in auto 
sales but weakness in other areas. Tourism has remained fairly robust. Housing markets have been softer, on balance, 
though the residential rental market has continued to firm. Commercial real estate markets have been steady to softer, 
and new commercial construction has tapered off somewhat. Finally, banks reported a pickup in loan demand from the 
household sector, though the financial sector overall showed further signs of weakening.     
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained stable and very tight 
across the District, but hiring has been subdued. Busi-
ness contacts have continued to report trouble finding 
workers to fill a wide range of jobs such as construction 
contractors, truck drivers, auto mechanics, IT profession-
als, accountants, retail clerks, and nursing home attend-
ants. A major New York City employment agency noted 
that almost all job candidates are merely jumping from 
other jobs. However, an upstate contact maintains that 
there has been a decrease in job-hopping.    
Businesses overall continued to report little change in 
staffing levels. Contacts in real estate, education & 
health, and leisure & hospitality reported continued 
modest net hiring, while those in manufacturing, whole-
sale trade, transportation, and information reported 
modest declines in employment, on balance. Looking 
ahead to the next six months, businesses in manufactur-
ing and most service sectors still plan on adding to staff; 
however, wholesale trade and information businesses 
anticipate modest declines in employment.   
While businesses generally report that wage growth has 
remained moderate, there has been more widespread 
escalation in some lower-wage industries such as retail 
trade and leisure & hospitality. A large New York City 
employment agency notes that finance-sector firms are 
largely holding the line on salary increases, and there is 
a wide gap between salary offers and job-seekers’ de-
mands.               
Prices  
Businesses in most sectors indicated continued moder-
ate increases in input costs and modest growth in selling 
prices. However, retailers have been reporting increas-
ingly widespread hikes in the prices they pay, and, to a 
somewhat lesser extent, in the prices they charge. One 
contact at a major chain noted that tariffs were raising 
costs, particularly on home goods, but that consumers 
were resistant to price increases on such merchandise. 
Contacts in the leisure & hospitality sector, however, 
have held prices steady and, in some cases, lowered 
prices. For example, rates on New York City hotel rooms 
and Broadway theater tickets have receded.  
Looking ahead, contacts in retail, wholesale, transporta-
tion, and manufacturing expressed a greater inclination 
to raise prices than others. Manufacturers and wholesal-
ers anticipated the most widespread hikes in prices paid.   
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales have softened in recent weeks and were 
mostly little changed from a year earlier. A major retail 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
chain noted that sales were down and somewhat below 
plan in September, partly reflecting weak demand for 
home goods. On a more positive note, some upstate 
New York retailers reported continued modest growth in 
both sales activity and shopper traffic. In general, inven-
tories were said to be near desired levels, helped by 
increased discounting over the summer.  
Sales of both new and used vehicles have remained 
solid in recent weeks, according to dealers in upstate 
New York. Inventories of new vehicles remained some-
what above desired levels, but there is some concern 
about maintaining ample inventories (especially of parts) 
if the GM strike drags out. Dealers indicated that service 
departments have remained busy and characterized 
consumer credit conditions as being in good shape.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported steady to slightly rising business 
activity. On the distribution side, transportation contacts 
indicated a modest pickup in activity, while wholesalers 
noted a significant drop-off in business.   
Looking ahead, manufacturers and wholesalers have 
grown less optimistic about the near-term outlook, while 
transportation firms have become somewhat more opti-
mistic. Contacts in all these sectors have expressed 
ongoing concern about tariffs and trade tensions and the 
related uncertainty going forward.  
Services 
Businesses across almost all service industries reported 
some weakening in activity, on balance, since the last 
report. However, contacts in leisure & hospitality noted a 
leveling off in activity, following a substantial pickup in 
the last report. Broadway theaters reported that attend-
ance and revenues picked up noticeably in the second 
half of September, following a sluggish spell in August 
and early September. Hotel occupancy remained solid 
across most of the District.  
Other service industries reported softening activity—
particularly those engaged in information services. Fi-
nance and real estate firms reported notable weakening, 
while professional & business and education & health 
service firms reported flat to modestly declining activity. 
Service firms, in general, have grown somewhat less 
optimistic about the near-term outlook.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, softer since the last report. The home 
sales market has weakened, especially in New York 
City, whereas rental markets have continued to strength-
en moderately.  
Prices of New York City condos and co-ops, which had 
been fairly steady through mid-year, slipped noticeably in 
the third quarter—most sharply in Manhattan. A local 
real estate expert noted that, while the city’s “mansion 
tax” (effective July 1) has curtailed high end sales, the 
price declines have occurred across the spectrum. More-
over, the inventory of resale inventories has risen notice-
ably. In contrast, home prices in the suburbs north of 
New York City have continued to rise slightly, while sales 
volume and inventory levels have been steady.  
The rental market has continued to trend stronger. Resi-
dential rents have continued to rise at a 3-5 percent 
pace, and the high end of the market has out-performed 
in recent months. Rental vacancy rates have declined 
further in New York City, and landlord concessions have 
continued to recede, though they remain fairly prevalent.  
Commercial real estate markets across the District have 
generally been steady to slightly softer. Office rents have 
been mostly flat, while availability rates have been mixed 
but up slightly, on balance, while leasing activity has 
slowed. Industrial markets have shown some signs of 
softening: rents have continued to rise but at a slower 
pace, while availability rates have begun to trend up. The 
market for retail space has remained soft. 
New multi-family construction starts have weakened 
noticeably across the New York City area, though there 
has been a modest pickup in upstate New York. Ongoing 
multi-family construction has remained fairly brisk. New 
office and industrial construction has weakened slightly 
across the District.   
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium sized banks in the District reported a 
rise in demand for consumer loans and residential mort-
gages but steady demand for commercial mortgages 
and C&I loans. Bankers reported higher refinancing 
activity. Banks reported unchanged credit standards and 
narrowing spreads across all loan categories. Contacts 
also reported widespread decreases in the average 
deposit rate. Finally, banks reported lower delinquency 
rates for consumer loans, but stable delinquencies 
across other categories. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate Third District business activity continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book period. 
Nonauto retail sales accelerated to a moderate pace of growth, and manufacturing continued to grow moderately. Non-
manufacturing and tourism continued at a modest pace of growth. Construction activity for residential and nonresidential 
buildings appeared to hold steady this period, as did commercial leasing activity; these three sectors had declined in the 
prior period. Sales of new autos and of existing homes continued to decline – at a slight and a moderate pace, respec-
tively. Labor markets tightened further throughout the District, and wages continued to grow moderately. Overall, price 
pressures remained modest. The firms’ outlook for growth over the next six months remained positive but softened, with 
less than half of all firms anticipating increases in general activity. Contacts frequently noted ongoing caution in the 
business plans of their clients and themselves, but most expected current business conditions to continue.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. About two-thirds of non-
manufacturing firms reported increases in staff – a bit 
higher than in the prior period – while the share of manu-
facturers reporting increases held steady at about one-
fourth. Average work hours have edged down since the 
prior period.  
Tight labor market conditions continued to be cited as a 
factor in slow hiring by nearly all firms. Staffing firm 
contacts described “acute pressure” in recent months, 
which has resulted in still fewer job applicants, more 
difficulty signing prospective job candidates and retaining 
current employees, and ongoing wage pressures.  
Wage growth continued at a moderate pace, with con-
tacts reporting wage increases ranging from above 3 
percent to 6 percent on a year-over-year basis. Reports 
were further mixed, with some contacts noting that wage 
growth had steadied and others noting an acceleration. 
The share of nonmanufacturing contacts who reported 
increases in wage and benefit costs edged down further 
to 40 percent; only 4 percent reported decreases.  
Prices  
The firms reported overall modest increases for both 
input prices and prices received for their own goods and 
services. The share of nonmanufacturing firms reporting 
increases in prices edged lower, while the share of man-
ufacturing firms reporting increases rose. Roughly one-
half to two-thirds of the firms reported no change in 
prices over the period. Most banking contacts continued 
to note no signs of inflation.  
Looking ahead six months, the anticipation of higher 
prices broadened further among manufacturers. The 
percentage of manufacturing firms that expect to pay 
higher prices for inputs rose to above 50 percent, and 
the share expecting to receive higher prices for their own 
goods increased to almost 45 percent.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturers continued to report moderate 
growth in activity. Although nearly half of all the firms 
reported no change in shipments and in new orders, the 
percentage of firms noting increases significantly out-
stripped those noting decreases for each metric.  
The makers of lumber products, paper products, chemi-
cals, fabricated metal products, and industrial machinery 
tended to note gains in new orders and shipments. Elec-
tronics producers reported little change, and the makers 
of primary metal products reported mixed results. Over-
all, these trends are not substantially different compared 
with the same period one year ago.  
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
Comments have been mixed. Several firms noted slow-
ing activity, heightened uncertainty, and ongoing con-
cerns over tariffs; a primary metals producer noted that 
“customers were hesitant.” However, others noted prod-
uct segments with strong demand and mixed effects 
from tariffs.  
Manufacturers’ expectations of activity over the next six 
months were mostly unchanged. Expectations of ship-
ments and of new orders edged lower but remained 
above long-term nonrecession averages. Expectations of 
future employment and planned capital spending also 
remained above average but rose a bit.  
Consumer Spending 
Contacts for malls and convenience stores reported 
moderate growth in nonauto retail sales – a somewhat 
faster pace than during the prior period. Mall store oper-
ators noted “solid traffic” and moderate year-over-year 
growth during the back-to-school season. Convenience 
store contacts continued to report strong sales – boosted 
by job stability among consumers and great weather.  
Auto sales edged lower but remained near high levels – 
sustained by fleet sales, even as consumer demand 
continued to decline, according to contacts. Pennsylva-
nia dealers noted that year-over-year sales had started 
to slow, while New Jersey dealers reported lower August 
and September combined sales. However, year-over-
year sales growth through September year to date re-
mained positive in both states.  
Tourism activity continued to grow at a modest pace. A 
Delaware shore contact reported strong visitor traffic, 
aided by excellent weather, and noted record levels of 
spending at local shops and restaurants, even as three 
new restaurants opened. Atlantic City casino revenues 
continued growing modestly.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, activity at service-sector firms continued at 
a modest pace of growth. The percentage of firms re-
porting increases in current revenues and in new orders 
remained positive but edged lower. One large firm noted 
continued improvement in the already low delinquent 
accounts receivables of its consumer base. This im-
provement was observed throughout the Third District 
and the country. Nearly one-half of the firms – slightly 
less than in the prior period – expect growth over the 
next six months.  
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported continued moderate growth in 
overall loan volumes (excluding credit cards) on a year-
over-year basis, although the rate seemed to strengthen 
somewhat. Meanwhile, credit card lending also contin-
ued at a moderate pace but appeared to edge slower.  
During the current period (reported without seasonal 
adjustments), volumes appeared to grow robustly in 
home mortgages, commercial real estate loans, and 
other consumer loans (not elsewhere classified). Home 
equity lines and auto lending grew moderately, while 
commercial and industrial loans grew modestly.  
Most banking contacts described incremental growth of 
the overall economy, constrained by a tight labor market 
and low housing inventories, with little shift in low delin-
quency rates. Banking contacts noted ongoing uncertain-
ty and more widespread talk of a (mild) recession risk in 
2020. However, most indicated that they and their clients 
felt that the U.S. economy was fundamentally sound and 
that they were planning (cautiously) for ongoing growth 
next year.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported no change in contract signings in 
the current period, on balance, although reports ranged 
somewhat from “continued strength” to “slightly off” from 
the prior period. To varying degrees, builders are shifting 
their product offerings to capture lower price points; 
however, production costs remain a challenge.  
Existing home sales continued to decline moderately on 
a year-over-year basis across most local markets, as 
exceedingly low inventories continued to constrain sales. 
A large Philadelphia-area broker noted that the trend 
continued through September and is not expected to 
shift much in 2020.  
On balance, commercial real estate construction and 
leasing activity seemed to hold steady at relatively high 
levels. Most contacts were bullish about current activity 
and noted that while the project pipeline has thinned, 
groundbreakings, project planning, and new inquiries 
remained relatively steady. One design firm noted it is 
struggling to keep pace with demand. Management firms 
noted positive net absorption, falling vacancy rates, and 
rising rents in many office and industrial segments. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research‐and‐data/regional‐
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Overall economic activity in the District was stable on balance, though reports varied by sector. A still favorable econom-
ic environment continued to boost demand for professional and business services generally, but some firms indicated 
that heightened uncertainty also contributed to the increase as customers sought more consulting services. Home sales 
and auto sales rose over the period, while consumer spending on nondurable goods was flat. Slowing global growth and 
trade tensions continued to weigh on manufacturing, but output stabilized as some customers rebuilt inventories after 
allowing them to run too low. Lenders suggested that overall loan demand was unchanged, even as lower interest rates 
boosted lending for homes and autos. Nonresidential construction remained strong, while residential construction sof-
tened modestly. Freight activity continued to fall. Employment was stable on balance, though reports by sector were 
mixed. Still, wages rose modestly because of persistently tight labor markets. Selling prices increased modestly on 
balance as firms sought to compensate for higher labor costs as well as increased pressure from rising nonlabor costs. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment was generally stable in the Fourth District, 
although there were scattered reports of softer demand 
for labor. Firms in the professional and business services 
sector continued to add staff in response to robust de-
mand. Most apparel and general merchandise stores 
held headcounts steady, as did construction contractors. 
Some bankers curbed hiring to focus on operational 
efficiencies and to reduce expenses. By contrast, some 
firms reduced employment levels as a direct result of 
softer demand for goods and services. Specifically, 
some manufacturers froze hiring and reduced hours, and 
planned to keep payrolls and hours at lower levels until 
product demand picked up again. Freight haulers (both 
trucking and rail) reduced headcounts to “align [human] 
resources to reduced volume levels.” 
Wages grew modestly on the whole in the Fourth Dis-
trict. Manufacturers continued to increase wages and 
enhance benefits offerings amid persistently tight labor 
markets. Higher wages were also reported by general 
merchandise and auto retailers. Retailers cited difficulty 
finding qualified workers and heightened competition for 
labor from distribution centers as contributing factors. 
Some professional and business services firms in-
creased skill requirements for new hires and therefore 
raised starting pay relative to wages of existing staff. 
Many real estate firms increased wages, citing a “war for 
talent.” By contrast, most construction contractors did not 
raise wages in this period, nor did most freight haulers.  
Prices  
On balance, selling prices rose modestly. Most changes 
in this period resulted from firms’ adjusting output prices 
to account for changes in input prices rather than from 
firms’ trying to increase their margins. Apparel and gen-
eral merchandise retailers reported upward pressure on 
clothes and food costs, pressure which was exacerbated 
by the September 1 tariff increases. Most retailers 
passed through these higher costs to consumers, alt-
hough a couple of retailers absorbed them into their 
margins, rather than raising prices, to preserve market 
share. Many trucking companies reported recent cost 
increases because geopolitical factors and new diesel 
taxes have increased prices at the pump. Some freight 
haulers were able to negotiate higher rates to account 
for these costs, but others remarked that the freight 
market was not robust enough to be able to push for 
higher rates. Manufacturers’ prices, which had been 
falling in the past couple of periods, stabilized in this 
period. Most construction contractors held prices steady 
because costs for construction materials were relatively 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
stable. Professional and business services firms held 
pricing steady, as well, because stiff competition limited 
individual firms’ ability to raise prices. 
Consumer Spending 
Retailers’ reports on consumer spending were mixed. 
Reports from auto dealers were generally more upbeat 
than those from other segments. Some auto dealers 
reported that light vehicle sales were up substantially, 
while others indicated that sales were flat. Apparel 
spending was relatively flat, and merchants noted that 
unseasonable weather adversely impacted sales. Con-
tacts in the restaurant industry reported that sales were 
down in this period because of increased competition 
from new restaurants.  
Manufacturing 
Overall manufacturing conditions appeared to stabilize 
following a few periods of slowing, although reports from 
contacts varied. A few manufacturers suggested that 
their customers let inventories run too low in anticipation 
of a more significant manufacturing slowdown than has 
materialized. As a result of the need to restock, demand 
for these manufacturers’ products picked up in recent 
months. Other manufacturers reported that demand 
continued to soften, citing a global slowdown in industrial 
activity and persistent trade-related uncertainties. Two-
thirds of contacts reported that capacity utilization was 
within a normal range, although several noted that labor 
shortages persist. Some manufacturers had existing 
capacity that was going unused for lack of workers, a 
situation which damped plans for further capital spend-
ing. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Nonresidential construction and real estate saw strong, 
steady demand over the period. Some nonresidential 
contractors noted an uptick in contracts for office and 
healthcare-related buildings. Most nonresidential con-
tractors expected construction to remain strong except-
ing winter slowdowns. However, some commercial real 
estate contacts expressed concern about slower de-
mand in the near future; one remarked that he would 
“expect increased trepidation as the election draws 
near.”  
Residential real estate agents reported moderately high-
er home sales and expected demand to continue to 
increase modestly in the near future. Real estate agents 
pointed to lower interest rates as the primary factor 
spurring stronger sales. Real estate agents also re-
marked on growth in the first-time homebuyer segment 
and in the ratio of homeowners to renters as lower inter-
est rates helped younger adults become homeowners. 
By contrast, homebuilders reported softening demand, 
which may suggest that households are uncertain about 
the medium-run economic outlook. 
Financial Services 
Loan demand was relatively unchanged. Lower interest 
rates spurred an increase in demand for auto loans, 
home mortgage originations, and loan refinancings. 
Some bankers noted that the pipeline for commercial 
loans remained strong, while others had noticed a slight 
softening. Core deposits ticked down, mostly as a result 
of falling interest rates, although one banker commented 
that competition had decreased because most banks are 
facing “not enough loan demand to go after deposits.”  
Professional and Business Services 
Activity in professional and business services strength-
ened. Contacts reported an increase in demand for a 
variety of products and services, pointing to strong busi-
ness conditions for their customers. Firms in consulting 
services suggested that global issues such as interna-
tional security concerns and worries of future economic 
volatility have increased demand for their services. The 
majority of professional and business services contacts 
anticipate that favorable economic conditions will carry 
into the first quarter of next year, although a few expect 
growth to slow. 
Freight 
Freight activity softened further since the last report. 
Most contacts reported flat or lower demand for freight 
services. Contacts cited as contributing to lower freight 
volumes declines in manufacturing activity, lower vol-
umes of coal shipments, and structural changes to trans-
pacific shipping supply chains. One freight executive 
summarized the situation as "our customers have in-
formed us they front-loaded much of their business to Q1 
2019 due to perceived or impending tariffs placed on 
goods to and from China." Despite the recent softness, 
contacts were more optimistic than during last period 
that freight volumes will pick up in the near future. ■ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, the Fifth District economy grew modestly in recent weeks. Manufacturers saw a modest decline in ship-
ments and new orders, overall, as trade policies continued to reduce sales and raise raw materials costs. Port activity 
grew robustly in recent weeks, particularly import volumes. Trucking companies reported a modest increase in demand 
and a rail company saw continued strength in auto and construction-related shipments. Travel and tourism picked up 
modestly despite some disruptions from hurricane evacuations in North and South Carolina. Retail sales rose moderate-
ly, overall, but some retailers expressed concerns that economic uncertainty could hamper fourth quarter sales. Home 
sales, although hampered by low inventories, rose modestly. Meanwhile, shortages of labor and buildable lots restrained 
new home construction. Commercial real estate leasing, sales, and construction picked up, although some softness was 
reported in retail and office construction. Loan demand picked up for real estate purchases and refinancing, but was flat 
for business and auto lending. Nonfinancial services firms saw a slight increase in demand in recent weeks and re-
mained cautiously optimistic about future growth. Labor markets remained tight and wages increased at a moderate rate. 
Overall, price growth remained moderate.     
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor strengthened moderately in re-
cent weeks. Employment agencies reported a seasonal 
pick-up in new job openings. Also, employers continued 
to report very tight labor markets and difficulties finding 
qualified workers. In particular, firms reported shortages 
of construction workers, engineers, IT professionals, 
accounting and finance professionals, manufacturing 
plant workers, mechanics, and truckers. Wages in-
creased moderately, overall, with some larger increases 
reported for jobs in high demand. Some employers said 
they were using non-wage compensation, such as sign-
on and stay-on bonuses, to attract and retain workers.        
Prices  
Price growth remained moderate overall since our 
previous report. Manufacturers indicated that growth in 
prices paid was little changed in recent weeks and 
remained slightly above growth in selling prices. Raw 
materials prices rose for steel plates, scrap metal, and 
electricity and remained elevated for some tariffed 
goods, while other materials prices were generally flat 
to down slightly. Service sector firms also reported 
moderate growth in prices paid that outpaced growth in 
selling prices.   
Manufacturing 
Fifth District manufacturers reported a modest decline in 
shipment and new orders. Several firms indicated that 
trade policy was reducing their foreign sales and raising 
raw materials costs. An electrical equipment manufactur-
er reported raising prices to cover tariff-related cost 
increases, while another firm looked to cut costs in other 
areas of the supply chain. A Virginia furniture manufac-
turer said that trade issues could lead to jobs losses if 
not resolved. Meanwhile, a food manufacturer cited the 
rapidly rising price of chicken as a concern, and a Virgin-
ia manufacturer reported looking for new suppliers over 
concerns about the possible effects of Brexit.       
Ports and Transportation 
Ports in the Fifth District saw robust growth since our last 
report. Import volumes continued to exceed export vol-
umes, but both showed healthy growth. Multiple ports 
saw record volumes in recent weeks. One executive 
reported an increase in vehicles going to Thailand and 
Russia for assembly to avoid Chinese tariffs. A Fifth 
District airport reported that cargo volumes continued to 
increase, although at a somewhat slower rate. Ports 
continued to hire and make new investments for expan-
sion.  
Fifth District trucking demand increased modestly, after 
softening in the previous months. One executive report-
ed turning away some business but not as much as a 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
year ago, while another reported having some excess 
capacity. Both were fairly content with the current level 
of demand. Another contact reported a slight disruption 
from Hurricane Dorian but business remained solid, 
overall. Meanwhile, a rail company saw some shipments 
move back to trucks but noted that auto and construc-
tion-related shipments remained strong. Some transpor-
tation contacts delayed investments over concerns 
about economic uncertainty.   
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Travel and tourism in the Fifth District were modest 
since our last report. On the outer banks of North Caroli-
na, hotels and restaurants saw strong business and 
increased receipts despite a temporary disruption from 
Hurricane Dorian evacuations. However, some restau-
rants had to close an extra day a week because of labor 
shortages when students went back to school. Charles-
ton, South Carolina, also saw fairly solid tourism despite 
a hurricane evacuation. Meanwhile, hotels in the District 
of Columbia reported a decline in rates and occupancy 
in recent weeks. 
On balance, retail sales rose moderately in recent 
weeks. A Virginia auto dealer reported strong sales of 
trucks and SUVs. However, a few firms reported de-
clines. A North Carolina home furnishing store reported 
a drop in sales instead of the normal seasonal uptick. 
Meanwhile, a hardware store said that lumber mills 
recently reduced production, which affected availability 
and prices. Several retailers said that they planned to 
reduce inventories and scale back capital spending over 
concerns that economic uncertainty could limit consum-
er spending in the fourth quarter.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales rose modestly in recent weeks and buyer 
traffic was steady, although inventories remained low. 
Most agents continued to see multiple offers in specific 
areas, especially for homes selling in the $250,000 to 
$400,000 price range. District home prices increased 
slightly, while average days on the market remained low. 
New home construction remained limited and was con-
strained by labor shortages and lot availability. 
Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately in re-
cent weeks. District brokers continued to report strong 
demand for industrial space and office leasing was 
described as healthy in most locations. Reports on retail 
leasing were mixed, as demand for smaller inline spaces 
remained steady, but demand for larger spaces de-
clined. Multifamily leasing remained healthy. Overall, 
industrial construction remained strong, while retail and 
office construction slowed. Vacancy rates remained low 
across most sub-markets, although some slight increas-
es in retail were reported. Contacts reported that rental 
rates were flat to increasing slightly. On the commercial 
sales side, brokers reported modest increases in prices 
and sales.   
Banking and Finance 
Loan demand rose moderately in recent weeks. Resi-
dential mortgage demand was generally described as 
stable to increasing modestly. On the commercial side, 
real estate loan demand strengthened modestly. Busi-
ness and automotive lending were flat, on balance. 
Bankers noted an uptick in residential and commercial 
refinancing due to lower interest rates. Deposits grew 
moderately since our last report and bankers continued 
to report heightened rate competition. Measures of credit 
quality remained stable at high levels.   
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, demand for nonfinancial services picked up 
slightly in recent weeks. Many service providers contin-
ued to report difficulties finding workers and rising labor 
costs, particularly for health insurance. In some cases, 
those firms faced profit margin compression since they 
were not able to pass along cost increases to customers. 
Overall, businesses remained cautiously optimistic about 
growth prospects over the next several months. There 
were several remarks about investing in software and 
technology. A few firms, on the other hand, were holding 
back on capital spending due to uncertainties around 
labor constraints and trade. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity expanded modestly from mid-August 
through September, and most contacts expect a similar pace to continue for the remainder of the year. The labor market 
remained tight, and a growing number of contacts shared reports of wage pressures increasing among lower-skilled 
positions. Some firms noted rising nonlabor costs and several contacts impacted by tariffs reported the ability to pass 
along price increases.  Retail sales levels remained unchanged since the previous report and automobile dealers noted 
sales were up for trucks and SUVs. Tourism activity was reported as mixed heading into the fall season. Residential real 
estate market activity improved since the previous report, and commercial real estate activity was stable. Manufacturing 
activity improved with purchasing managers noting increased new orders and production since the previous report. 
Bankers indicated that activity was steady, on balance. 
Employment and Wages  
Most firms reported that staffing levels were in line with 
expectations for flat to slightly higher growth in payrolls 
compared with the prior year. Exceptions emerged in 
industry sectors directly related to export logistics and 
freight, where some labor force reductions were noted. 
Overall, however, business contacts continued to ob-
serve tightening in several labor market segments, shar-
ing that many positions remained unfilled for long peri-
ods of time, encouraging some employers to lower hiring 
standards. Labor availability challenges were broadly 
viewed as firms’ biggest constraint to growth. As a result, 
firms continued to explore recruiting and retention op-
tions. 
Annual wage increases, on average, remained in the 3-4 
percent range; however, wage growth continued to 
accelerate for lower-skill positions. Across industry sec-
tors, there was growing dialog about increasing minimum 
hourly wages to $15 per hour. 
Prices  
Some firms reported rising nonlabor input costs, particu-
larly for products impacted by tariffs. Overall pricing 
power remained limited and some businesses were 
considering alternative approaches to maintaining mar-
gins. However, several contacts impacted by tariffs were 
more successful in passing along increases. The Atlanta 
Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey showed 
year-over-year unit costs were up 1.9 percent in Septem-
ber. Survey respondents indicated they expect unit costs 
to rise 2.0 percent over the next twelve months. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retail sales levels were unchanged since the 
previous report. Retailers remained concerned that 
heightened uncertainty among consumers due to the 
geo-political environment would negatively impact con-
sumer confidence and spending behavior during the 
upcoming holiday season. Light trucks and SUV units 
drove the month-over-month increase in new vehicles 
sales in August while sales of used vehicles also rose. 
District tourism activity remained mixed, and uncertainty 
remained elevated since the last report. On balance, the 
start of the fall season was softer than expected with a 
year-over-year decline in hotel occupancy and average 
daily rates in Louisiana and Florida. Strong leisure travel 
and business conference bookings were reported in 
Alabama and Georgia. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Low mortgage rates improved housing affordability and 
led to increased demand for housing throughout the 
District. Overall, home sales increased on a month-over-
month and a year-over-year basis. Demand remained 
strongest in the more affordable price segments, where 
inventory remained limited. Declining inventory levels led 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
to strong upward pressure on home prices. New home 
sales improved as builders sought to ramp up construc-
tion levels while offering incentives and discounts to 
increase sales traffic. 
Overall, the pace of activity in the commercial sector 
remained steady during the reporting period. Most sec-
tors experienced positive dynamics as vacancies contin-
ued to trend downward. Despite growing construction 
costs, contacts reported healthy construction activity. A 
robust amount of concentrated new multifamily construc-
tion continued to dominate specific metro submarkets 
leading to increased concerns of possible oversupply. 
Industry participants noted continuing strength in the 
industrial sector. Contacts reported capital was readily 
available, and that greater amounts of financing along 
with loosening underwriting standards were creating 
strong tailwinds and risks for some projects.   
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing contacts reported a moderate 
rebound in overall business activity since the last report-
ing period. New orders and production levels increased 
notably and purchasing managers indicated that supply 
delivery times were slightly longer. Finished inventory 
levels were reported to have increased somewhat, while 
optimism for future production was unchanged, with 
close to one-third of contacts expecting higher levels of 
production over the next six months. 
Transportation 
On balance, transportation activity was little changed 
since the previous report. Total rail traffic fell, and inter-
modal volumes declined substantially. Trucking compa-
nies saw decreased shipments compared with year-
earlier levels. Air cargo contacts reported weakness in 
international freight volumes. Port contacts continued to 
report record levels of growth in container traffic. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions were steady. Margins 
at banks were stable as higher loan yields offset in-
creased funding costs. Total loan growth was positive 
but slowing, especially for smaller community banks. 
Asset quality remained strong with fewer loans transi-
tioning from 30-89 days delinquent to 90 days or more. 
Energy  
Energy manufacturing continued to expand across the 
District in order to meet growing domestic and global 
demand for chemicals, natural gas, and refined products. 
Business contacts reported continued investment in 
pipeline infrastructure, as demand for transportation 
outlets for products to be processed remained elevated. 
Investment persisted in utilities, where growth in refining 
and chemical processing segments has necessitated 
additional power plants and transmission lines. Utilities 
contacts described growing investment in natural gas 
pipeline infrastructure. Renewables activity was steady 
from the prior reporting period, as solar energy facility 
installations continued across Florida. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained mixed. Reports indicat-
ed much of the District was drought-free, although parts 
of Alabama, Georgia, the Florida panhandle, and Ten-
nessee continued to experience abnormally dry to mod-
erate drought conditions. The USDA designated several 
counties within the District as natural disaster areas due 
to damages and losses attributed to several inclement 
weather events this year. Cotton, corn, and peanut pro-
duction forecasts were ahead of last year’s production 
while rice and soybean production forecasts were below. 
On a year-over-year basis, prices paid to farmers in July 
were up for corn and beef but down for cotton, rice, 
soybeans, broilers, and eggs. However, on a month-over
-month basis, prices increased for corn, cotton, rice, and 
soybeans but declined for beef, broilers and eggs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy‐matters/regional‐economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased slightly overall in late August and September, and contacts expected 
growth to continue at a similar pace over the next 12 months. Employment, consumer spending, business spending, 
and construction and real estate all increased slightly. Manufacturing production declined a bit. Wages and prices rose 
slightly and financial conditions improved modestly. The crop harvest got off to a slow start, as rains delayed fieldwork. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased slightly over the reporting period 
and contacts expected a similar-sized increase over the 
next 12 months. Hiring continued to be focused on pro-
fessional and technical, sales, and production workers. 
As they have for some time, contacts indicated that the 
labor market was tight and that it was difficult to fill posi-
tions at all skill levels. One auto supplier facing a decline 
in sales due to the GM strike planned to cut workers’ 
hours rather than making layoffs because he felt that in 
the tight labor market, it would be too difficult to find new 
workers after the strike ended. A staffing firm reported 
little change in billable hours. Wages increased slightly 
overall. Contacts were most likely to report wage in-
creases for professional and technical, administrative, 
and production workers. Many firms reported rising 
benefits costs. 
Prices 
Prices rose slightly in late August and September, 
though contacts expected prices to rise somewhat faster 
over the next 12 months. Retail prices moved up slightly, 
with reports of increases related to both realized and 
potentially higher tariffs. Producer prices edged up, with 
contacts reporting stable freight costs and slower in-
creases in labor and materials costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased slightly on balance over 
the reporting period. Nonauto retail sales moved up a bit, 
with reports of gains in the appliances, outdoor, and lawn 
and garden sectors, but declines in apparel. Contacts 
expected holiday spending to be similar to or slightly 
higher than last year. Contacts reported lower tourism 
volumes. New light vehicle sales increased at a moder-
ate pace and dealers reported that margins on new 
vehicles continued to shrink. Used vehicle sales re-
mained at a strong level, surprising some dealers. Con-
tacts said that the strike at GM hadn’t yet hurt new vehi-
cle sales, but believed that it would if the strike continued 
into November. The strike had created parts shortages 
though, which resulted in extended wait times for some 
repairs. In addition, there were reports of dealers provid-
ing only basic services for GM vehicles such as oil 
changes and tire rotations. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in late August and 
September. Retail inventories were a little high overall, 
with reports that sales of fall merchandise were below 
expectations. Contacts said that the strike at GM was 
slowly depleting inventories of GM vehicles, but that 
inventories at GM suppliers were expected to keep grow-
ing until the strike ends. Most manufacturers reported 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
comfortable inventory levels, though there were reports 
of shortages of stainless steel. Capital spending moved 
up slightly, and contacts expected that pace to continue 
over the next 12 months. Outlays were primarily for 
replacing industrial and IT equipment and renovating 
structures. Contacts continued to note that elevated 
uncertainty about international trade policy was holding 
back investment and spurring efforts to diversify supply 
chains. Demand for transportation services declined 
modestly. Commercial and industrial energy demand 
was little changed, with increases in commercial con-
sumption offset by declines in industrial consumption. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction rose 
modestly, with increased starter home construction 
outweighing lower high-end homebuilding. Contacts 
indicated that rising costs continued to put a damper on 
building. Residential real estate activity was little 
changed on balance, with higher sales of low- and mod-
erately-priced homes offset by fewer sales of high-priced 
homes. Overall, home values rose slightly. Nonresiden-
tial construction activity was little changed. Nonresiden-
tial builders also noted that rising costs were slowing 
activity. Commercial real estate activity increased slight-
ly. Contacts reported that demand from investors for 
buildings with tenants already in place continued to be 
strong. Rents, vacancies, and the availability of sublease 
space were little changed. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production decreased slightly in late 
August and September. Demand in the automotive in-
dustry decreased some, but remained at a solid level. 
Contacts noted that the halt in production at GM plants 
due to the strike was starting to affect auto suppliers’ 
order books. Demand for steel decreased slightly. Heavy 
machinery manufacturers also reported a slight drop in 
orders, led by declines in demand from the oil and gas 
sector. Orders fell for specialty metals manufacturers as 
well, driven by decreased demand from the auto indus-
try. Demand for heavy trucks increased, though contacts 
expected demand to slow through the rest of the year. 
Banking and Finance 
Overall, financial conditions improved modestly over the 
reporting period. Participants in the equity and bond 
markets reported a slight improvement in conditions. 
Business loan demand rose modestly, with growth 
spread across sectors. There were numerous reports of 
increased refinancing volumes for commercial real es-
tate loans. Loan quality remained solid across most 
sectors. Contacts again said that lending standards were 
little changed, but noted that strong competition was 
creating pressure to loosen them. Consumer loan de-
mand increased modestly, with reports of higher mort-
gage refinancing and home purchasing volumes. Loan 
quality and standards were little changed. 
Agriculture 
The corn and soybean harvest got off to a slow start in 
the District, as rains delayed fieldwork. In addition, the 
harvest started later than usual because heavy spring 
rains had delayed planting and crops were up to a month 
behind in maturity. Contacts had mounting concerns 
about how much of this year’s crop would be able to fully 
mature before a hard frost hits. Overall, contacts ex-
pected the harvest to be well below those of recent 
years. Corn and soybean prices moved higher, especial-
ly toward the end of the reporting period. Egg and dairy 
prices were up, but hog and cattle prices drifted down. 
Contacts noted that although there was still uncertainty 
about the size of China’s purchases of agricultural prod-
ucts, there was positive news for farmers in the newly 
announced trade deal with Japan and in recent adjust-
ments to the implementation of the Renewable Fuels 
Standard that will support demand for biofuels. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts suggest economic conditions have improved slightly since our previous report. Contacts from 
multiple industries noted a heightened sense of economic uncertainty. Labor market conditions remained tight, although 
there were indications of declines in manufacturing employment. Contacts noted a strengthening of price pressures, but 
remained mixed as to their ability to pass higher costs on to their customers. Consumer spending activity increased 
slightly. Outstanding loan volumes at District banks continued to expand, but growth slowed compared with three 
months ago. Row crop conditions remained poor; production levels are expected to be well below those of last year.    
Employment and Wages  
Employment conditions have been mixed since the 
previous report. The number of posted job vacancies for 
nonfinancial services occupations increased from July to 
August. Contacts continued to report labor market tight-
ness and difficulty hiring and retaining qualified employ-
ees; one St. Louis area hospitality firm reported that 
some candidates were not even showing up for sched-
uled interviews. Several firms reported taking additional 
steps to compete for workers, such as increasing bene-
fits, relaxing hiring standards, and increasing outreach. 
Other firms described creative attempts to adapt their 
business practices to a worker shortage, such as retrain-
ing existing employees to work other positions. Con-
versely, survey-based measures of employment showed 
declines in some sectors, particularly manufacturing. An 
Arkansas grocer reported that the state’s increase in the 
minimum wage has forced them to rethink the number of 
employees they can deploy per store.  
Wages have grown moderately since the previous re-
port, in part due to continued upward pressure from the 
tight labor market. Wage growth at smaller firms has 
been more modest. Several local contacts at such com-
panies reported struggling to match wage increases 
offered by larger firms.  
Prices  
Price pressures have increased modestly since the 
previous report. Business contacts largely noted positive 
growth in nonlabor input costs. Construction contacts, in 
particular, reported moderate growth, with some of these 
price increases attributed to new tariffs. This trend 
comes despite recent declines in steel prices, which 
have fallen 8 percent since the previous report and 33 
percent from one year ago. The ability of firms to pass 
higher input costs on to consumers was mixed. Contacts 
generally reported increasing prices charged to consum-
ers, but some cited difficulties doing so due to price 
competition from online competitors and inflexible pricing 
agreements with large buyers.    
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hospi-
tality contacts indicate that consumer spending activity 
has increased slightly since our previous report. August 
real sales tax collections increased in Missouri, Arkan-
sas, Tennessee, and Kentucky relative to a year ago. 
Consumer sentiment in West Tennessee has increased 
since June, but future expectations about the economy 
six months from now have declined. Auto dealers in 
Arkansas reported stronger sales in the past few months 
compared with earlier in the year, especially for used 
vehicles. Hospitality contacts in the St. Louis region 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
remained optimistic about tourism growth in the coming 
months despite some uncertainty and downside risk.    
Manufacturing 
Overall manufacturing activity has declined slightly since 
our previous report. Survey-based indexes suggested 
that manufacturing activity decreased slightly in both 
Arkansas and Missouri from August to September. Pro-
duction levels were down slightly in Missouri but relative-
ly unchanged in Arkansas. New orders fell in both states. 
Several companies announced new capital expenditures 
and hiring plans, but others announced operation reduc-
tions or facility closures.    
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the transportation sector has improved mod-
estly since the previous report. Barge activity along the 
Arkansas and Mississippi rivers continued to recover 
from the slowdowns caused by months of high water 
conditions earlier in the year. Passenger traffic at District 
airports remained above year-ago levels while cargo 
traffic declined slightly. Contacts in Arkansas reported 
that commercial trucks and rail cars are in good supply. 
Logistics firms announced plans to expand operations 
and increase their workforce within the District.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential sales activity has been unchanged since the 
previous report. Seasonally adjusted home sales in-
creased slightly in Little Rock but were unchanged in 
Louisville, Memphis, and St. Louis. Inventory levels in 
the District continued to be depressed.  
Residential construction activity increased slightly. There 
was a slight uptick in August permit activity across Dis-
trict MSAs relative to the previous month. Contacts from 
Louisville and Little Rock reported that landlords have 
become less inclined to renovate older buildings be-
cause of rising labor and material costs.  
Commercial construction activity was mixed. The num-
ber of commercial construction projects fell slightly from 
July to August across most of the states in the District. 
Multiple contacts reported increased uncertainty sur-
rounding projects due to the ongoing trade dispute with 
China. A contact from Little Rock reported that rising 
costs have limited speculative construction. However, 
there were multiple reports of healthy demand for com-
mercial construction and infrastructure development in 
the District, and local contacts continued to note labor 
shortages. 
 
        
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have improved modest-
ly since the previous report. Outstanding loan volumes at 
District banks grew by 3 percent in the third quarter 
relative to year-ago levels, which was a slight decrease 
from the second quarter of 2019. This slowdown contin-
ued the nearly steady downward trend in loan growth 
since the end of 2016. District growth remained slower 
than the national rate for the fourth consecutive quarter. 
Commercial and industrial lending maintained a positive 
growth rate, growing by 2 percent year over year,    
although growth has slowed significantly in this category 
over the past two quarters. Commercial real estate lend-
ing grew at the same rate as the prior quarter. However, 
residential real estate lending contracted slightly.    
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have declined modestly 
compared with the previous report. Production and yield 
forecasts fell for corn and soybeans from August to 
September but improved for cotton. Expected rice pro-
duction also declined over the same period, but ex-
pected yields ticked up. Relative to 2018, corn, rice, and 
soybean production levels are projected to decrease 
sharply, largely due to the unusually wet weather and 
flooding during the planting season. However, cotton 
production levels are expected to improve compared 
with last year. The outlook among contacts remained 
relatively pessimistic due to depressed commodity prices 
and trade uncertainty. Farmers in southern Indiana also 
expressed concern over the recent lack of rain.  
Natural resource extraction conditions have declined 
slightly from July to August, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production decreasing about 1 percent. August coal 
production was nearly 2 percent higher than a year ago.  
■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew at a slight pace since the last report. Employment was flat, while wage pressures were 
moderate overall and price pressures remained modest. The District economy saw growth in tourism, services, commer-
cial construction and real estate, and energy. Consumer spending and residential construction and real estate were 
mixed. Manufacturing decreased slightly, while agricultural conditions remained weak.   
Employment and Wages 
Employment was flat since the last report. August 
employment rose over the previous month in three 
District states, but fell in two others. Hiring demand 
remained healthy, but there were some signs of 
softness. Separate polls of human resources contacts in 
Minnesota and Montana showed that the large majority 
of firms were hiring, and virtually none were cutting staff. 
Construction firms in Minnesota reported strong demand 
for skilled trades workers, but lower demand for other 
staffing needs. Staffing contacts in Minnesota saw slight 
growth in job orders overall in the third quarter compared 
with last year, but several reported significant decreases. 
Expectations for the fourth quarter were mostly flat, with 
many expecting an increase in unfilled job orders due to 
very tight labor conditions. A strong majority of 
respondents to a survey of Ninth District firms indicated 
that they planned to leave employment unchanged or 
increase it slightly over the coming three months. August 
job postings were lower in Minnesota, Montana, and 
North Dakota; flat in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula; and up 
slightly in South Dakota. Hiring sentiment in two regional 
indexes fell notably for respondents in Minnesota and 
the Dakotas; one index fell into contraction for all three 
states. Initial unemployment claims rose slightly overall 
among District states over the most recent six-week 
period (ending mid-September) compared with a year 
earlier, with Wisconsin and the Dakotas seeing the 
largest increases.  
Wage pressures were moderate overall. A solid majority 
of human resources poll respondents in Minnesota and 
Montana said that wages rose by 3 percent or less over 
the past 12 months, and wage expectations for the 
coming 12 months were softer. Wage growth was 
stronger among construction and staffing contacts in 
Minnesota, but each group also expected wage pressure 
to lessen somewhat in the coming year. A staffing 
contact in Montana said wages for entry-level positions 
continued to rise, and those who raised wages last year 
to stay competitive were re-evaluating additional 
increases. A North Dakota staffing contact noted that 
while wages were rising overall, some clients were 
intentionally not raising wages for unskilled labor 
because it “does not make much difference” in the 
workers they attract or retain, “unless they raise pay 
scales significantly.”    
Prices  
Since the previous report, price pressures remained 
modest. Most respondents to a survey of firms across 
the Ninth District indicated only flat or slight increases in 
input costs over the previous quarter, with a similarly 
subdued outlook for the final three months of the year. 
However, firms continued to note faster growth in health 
insurance premiums. Retail fuel prices in District states 
as of early October were roughly unchanged relative to 
the previous reporting period. Prices received by farmers 
in August increased from a year earlier for corn, 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
potatoes, hogs, cattle, milk, and turkeys, while prices for 
wheat, soybeans, hay, eggs, and chickens decreased.    
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was mixed since the last report. 
South Dakota gross sales in August grew by 5 percent 
compared with a year ago, and the state’s gaming 
handle was almost 4 percent higher. Conversely, gross 
sales in Wisconsin were flat, and North Dakota sales tax 
collections were 5 percent lower than a year earlier. 
Assisted by good weather, the Minnesota State Fair in 
late August and early September saw record attendance. 
A vehicle dealership with multiple outlets in the western 
Dakotas and Montana saw new-vehicle sales grow by 4 
percent in August, while used cars fell by 4 percent. 
Another dealership with outlets across the eastern 
portion of the District saw strong sales over the summer, 
including August and September, with sales slightly 
stronger in used versus new vehicles. According to 
industry sources, marine and recreational vehicle sales 
in District states have been lower this summer compared 
with last year, but powersport sales have been on par.  
Tourism saw growth overall in the most recent period. In 
northern Wisconsin, tourism businesses reported strong 
activity at the end of the summer, with lodging facilities 
seeing solid bookings through mid-September. A large 
campground in the region reported modestly more 
summer bookings and higher average customer 
spending. Hotel occupancy rates in Minnesota were 
slightly higher in August compared with a year earlier, 
and revenue per room was 3 percent higher. Total 
passengers at District airports increased compared with 
a year earlier: August passengers through Minneapolis-
St. Paul were up 3 percent, and seven other regional 
airports saw increases ranging from 4 percent to 20 
percent. However, among nine major national parks in 
District states, only two registered an increase in August 
visitors compared with a year earlier.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services sector increased 
moderately. Several engineering firms reported large 
backlogs of work. Regional hospital systems and clinics 
continued to plan large capital expenditures for 
expansions over the medium term. In contrast, contacts 
in the trucking and rail transportation sector reported a 
slowdown in freight volumes.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction rose moderately since the last 
report. A construction database showed that August 
construction starts in the District were higher than a year 
earlier. A second industry database showed that new 
and active projects in the District over the most recent 
six-week period (ending September 27) were roughly on 
par with the same period a year earlier. A number of 
subcontractors in Minnesota reported large backlogs. 
Industry contacts in Montana also reported healthy 
activity. Residential permitting for single-family units in 
August was flat or lower across the large majority of 
metros in the District compared with a year earlier. While 
single-family construction lagged, however, some 
regions continued to see strong multifamily permitting, 
including Minneapolis-St. Paul.  
Commercial real estate grew modestly since the last 
report. Despite steady delivery of new units, multifamily 
housing vacancy rates in Minneapolis-St. Paul remained 
among the lowest in the country for major metropolitan 
regions, leading to rent increases. Industrial space in the 
region continued to see low vacancy rates and healthy 
expansion. New retail construction in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul has declined, although grocery has continued its 
expansion in the region, and vacancy rates remained 
fairly stable. Residential real estate was mixed. Closed 
home sales in August fell compared with a year earlier 
across Minnesota, as well as in Missoula, Mont., Sioux 
Falls, S.D., Grand Forks, N.D., and northern Wisconsin. 
However, closed sales rose in Bozeman and Helena, 
Mont., Fargo, N.D., and western Wisconsin.    
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity decreased slightly relative 
to the previous report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions indicated decreased activity in September 
compared with a month earlier in Minnesota and South 
Dakota and flat activity in North Dakota. Multiple 
contacts in custom manufacturing and metal fabrication 
reported a slowdown in new orders, and several said 
they expect a slower fourth quarter. In contrast, 
producers of heavy equipment and building materials 
noted increased demand from the construction sector.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak. Heavy 
rains that hampered crop planting this season have 
persisted into the fall and may complicate harvests in 
some areas, according to sources. Recent forecasts 
indicated that corn and soybean production in District 
states may decrease 10 percent and 20 percent, 
respectively, in 2019 compared with last year. District oil 
and gas exploration activity increased moderately 
relative to the previous report. The number of active 
drilling rigs rose as of September from a month earlier, 
but industry contacts reported that demand for workers 
and materials was little changed. District iron ore mines 
continued to operate at near capacity. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District rose slightly in late August and September, with gains in consumer spending, 
professional and high-tech services, transportation and wholesale trade driving overall growth. Consumer spending rose 
modestly, led by solid retail and auto sales. Manufacturing activity edged down, driven by continued declines in durable 
goods plants, but was expected to expand slightly in the coming months. District real estate activity increased, but con-
tacts expected conditions to soften this fall. Energy activity declined in the District as the number of active rigs fell and 
oil and gas production levels also eased. The agriculture sector remained weak, while crop and cattle prices remained 
relatively stable. Bankers reported modestly higher loan demand and an improvement in loan quality. Employment 
levels rose in most services sectors, but contacts in the energy and manufacturing sectors noted a decline. District 
manufacturing and services firms expected employment to increase by 3 percent on average in 2020. Wages grew 
modestly, and the pace of gains was anticipated to accelerate in the months ahead. District input and selling prices also 
rose modestly since the previous survey period. 
Employment and Wages  
District employment rose since the last survey as a 
majority of services sector contacts noted increasing 
employment levels, while contacts in the manufacturing 
and energy sectors reported a slight decline. Employ-
ment levels were above year-ago levels in both the 
services and manufacturing sectors, but slightly below in 
the energy sector. Expectations for employment growth 
were positive across most sectors, and survey respond-
ents in the manufacturing and services sectors expected 
employment in their firms to rise by 3 percent on average 
in 2020.  
A majority of contacts continued to report labor shortag-
es across all skill levels. Specifically, contacts noted 
shortages for truck drivers, hourly retail and food-
services positions, auto-technicians, pilots, IT personnel, 
nurses, and skilled construction workers. Wages were 
modestly higher than the previous survey period, and 
wage gains were expected to accelerate at a faster pace 
moving forward.             
Prices  
District selling and input prices increased modestly in 
late August and September and were moderately above 
year-ago levels. Contacts expected additional gains in 
the coming months. Retail input and selling prices were 
strongly above levels from both the previous survey 
period and the same period one year-ago, and expecta-
tions were for similar increases moving forward. In con-
trast, restaurants reported steady input and selling prices 
compared to the previous survey period, although both 
were moderately above year-ago levels. Respondents in 
the manufacturing and transportation sectors reported 
modestly higher input and selling prices compared to a 
year ago and anticipated similar gains in the months 
ahead. Selling prices in the construction supply sector 
rose modestly since the previous survey but remained 
modestly lower than year-ago levels.             
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending climbed modestly compared to the 
previous survey period, and contacts anticipated addi-
tional sales growth heading into the winter months. Re-
tail sales rose modestly since the previous survey peri-
od, and expectations were for sales to rise in the next 
few months but at a slower pace. Lower-priced items 
continued to sell well, while sales of higher-priced items 
lagged. Auto sales expanded robustly compared to the 
previous survey period and year-ago levels, and con-
tacts anticipated modest increases in the coming 
months. Unlike retail and auto contacts, restaurant con-
tacts reported a strong decline in sales in late August 
and September. However, restaurant sales remained 
slightly above year-ago levels and were expected to hold 
steady in the months ahead. Tourism sales were flat 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
compared to the previous survey period, and contacts 
anticipated a modest decline in the coming months.        
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity edged lower compared to the 
previous survey and year-ago levels, driven by continued 
declines at durable goods plants. Manufacturers ex-
pected activity to expand slightly in the months ahead. 
New orders and the backlog of orders declined, while 
factory production and shipments increased slightly. 
Factory production, shipments, and volume of new or-
ders were expected to increase moving forward. Capital 
spending remained modestly above year-ago levels, but 
contacts anticipated much slower growth in the months 
ahead. One contact attributed delayed capital spending 
to high tariffs that could not be passed along to custom-
ers.  
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the transportation 
sector experienced moderately higher sales, while sales 
increased strongly in both the wholesale trade sector 
and professional and high-tech services sector. Expecta-
tions for all three sectors were for strong growth moving 
forward.              
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity increased since the last sur-
vey, but residential construction activity declined and 
contacts expected a slower pace of overall real estate 
activity moving forward. Contacts in the residential real 
estate sector reported modestly higher home sales and 
inventories since the previous survey, and inventories 
were projected to hold steady in the months ahead. 
Residential real estate respondents continued to note 
that sales of low- and medium-priced homes outpaced 
sales of higher-priced homes. Residential construction 
activity fell modestly in late August and September and 
was projected to decline further this fall. Commercial real 
estate activity rose slightly as sales increased, construc-
tion underway was flat, and vacancy rates fell. Commer-
cial real estate contacts projected activity to continue to 
expand but at a slightly slower pace in the next few 
months.  
Banking 
Bankers reported a modest increase in overall loan 
demand across several categories. Respondents indicat-
ed a modest increase in demand for residential real 
estate loans. Demand for agricultural and consumer 
installment loans increased slightly from previous levels, 
while the demand for commercial real estate and com-
mercial and industrial loans declined slightly. Bankers 
indicated modest improvement in loan quality compared 
to a year ago, but expected a slight decrease in loan 
quality over the next six months. Credit standards re-
mained largely unchanged in all major loan categories, 
and deposit levels were stable.             
Energy 
District energy activity decreased since the previous 
survey period, and expectations for future drilling and 
business activity also declined. The number of active rigs 
continued to fall across most District states in both the oil 
and gas sectors. Oil and gas production levels also 
eased in the third quarter, and District energy firms re-
ported drilling and business activity levels were below 
those from this time last year. Firms reported that total 
revenues, profits, employment levels, and access to 
credit also declined. Sixty percent of regional energy 
contacts indicated that current low prices for oil and 
natural gas were the main constraint limiting near-term 
growth in activity among areas where their firms were 
active. Additionally, a majority of District energy contacts 
expressed negative impacts from trade tensions and 
tariffs over the past year, and most firms anticipated 
negative business effects from trade policy to continue in 
2020.              
Agriculture 
Agricultural economic conditions in the Tenth District 
generally remained weak. Major row crop and cattle 
prices were generally stable following sharp declines in 
the prior period. U.S. corn and soybean production was 
expected to decline slightly in 2019, but not enough to 
materially reduce large outstanding supplies. In contrast 
to other areas of the U.S., a slight increase in corn pro-
duction was expected throughout the region and could 
contribute to a slight improvement in revenues. Con-
versely, soybean production was expected to be moder-
ately lower, and prices continued to be damped by on-
going trade disputes. In the livestock sector, recently 
disrupted beef production channels continued to put 
downward pressure on cattle prices, but stronger pork 
exports drove a moderate increase in hog prices. In 
addition, the distribution of 2019 USDA trade relief pay-
ments could provide additional short-term support to 
farm cash flows. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Moderate expansion continued in the Eleventh District economy. Growth continued in manufacturing and nonfinancial 
services and resumed in retail after flat sales in the previous period. Home sales increased and loan demand accelerat-
ed. Energy activity declined and agricultural conditions deteriorated due to hot and dry weather. Employment growth 
was solid while wage pressures continued. Selling prices were largely flat, as firms’ ability to pass through cost increas-
es remained limited. Outlooks improved in manufacturing and nonfinancial services, were unchanged in retail and finan-
cial services, and softened in energy. Uncertainty generally remained elevated, driven by trade tensions, the political 
climate, recession concerns, and weaker global growth. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to expand at a solid pace. Hiring 
picked up in manufacturing, while headcounts fell in the 
oil and gas sector. A staffing services firm noted that 
direct hires have been increasing while demand for 
contract workers has abated. A majority of firms trying to 
hire reported they were having difficulty finding qualified 
workers. Labor shortages continued to span most indus-
tries, skill levels, and regions. Contacts in retail, leisure 
and hospitality, and professional and business services 
cited difficultly hiring and retaining workers as a leading 
issue. A manufacturing contact expressed plans to invest 
more in capital equipment to reduce their dependence 
on labor in expanding their business. 
Wage pressures continued but retreated slightly to more 
average levels. 
Prices 
Input prices continued to rise at a moderate pace, with 
an uptick seen in prices paid for raw materials among 
manufacturers. Several contacts pointed to tariffs and 
trade policy as a driver of higher costs. Firms’ ability to 
pass higher costs on to customers was somewhat 
mixed, but reports of difficulty were more common than 
reports of ease. Selling prices were largely flat in the 
manufacturing and services sectors while prices re-
ceived for oil and gas support services declined. Several 
contacts reported squeezed profit margins.  
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector continued at a 
moderate pace. Growth in September was slightly slower 
than what was seen in August, but still stronger than the 
first half of the year. The modest deceleration in Septem-
ber output growth was fairly broad based, led by machin-
ery and fabricated metals manufacturing. Refiners and 
chemical producers indicated softening global demand 
growth was putting downward pressure on production 
this year. Some recent strength was seen in transporta-
tion equipment manufacturing.  
Outlooks among manufacturers remained positive, alt-
hough several contacts pointed to increased uncertainty 
stemming from tariffs and trade tensions, the political 
climate, and the global economy. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales strengthened slightly over the reporting 
period, although some weakness was seen in autos and 
in sales at stores located near the Mexico border. Con-
tacts in Austin noted very healthy retail activity, with 
national chains and local retailers eager to expand in the 
region but rather limited by lack of available retail space. 
One contact noted a negative impact from Tropical 
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Storm Imelda. Outlooks were largely unchanged, an 
improvement from the deterioration noted so far this 
year. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services activity expanded moderately over 
the reporting period. Growth in professional and tech-
nical services continued to lead the expansion, while 
administrative and support services also picked up pace. 
Staffing services contacts reported high demand in all 
markets, with particular strength in IT, accounting, bank-
ing, and healthcare. Activity in the transportation and 
warehousing sector remained mixed, with strong airline 
passenger demand and rising sea cargo volumes but 
some weakness in air and rail cargo volumes. Both rail 
and sea cargo contacts reported declines in trade with 
China, in some cases offset by stronger trade with 
Southeast Asia. 
Service-sector outlooks were slightly positive. Contacts 
cited uncertainty as a serious issue hampering future 
demand and business expansion plans. Tariffs, the 
presidential election, and national or global recession 
fears were among the drivers of increased uncertainty. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales continued to trend upward. The increase 
was broad based, with some contacts noting that sales 
were better than expected. New-home sales appeared to 
be the strongest in Austin. Recent flooding in the eastern 
parts of Houston may impact housing starts in coming 
weeks. Margins improved slightly, and outlooks were 
cautiously optimistic, with some builders concerned 
about an impending U.S. recession.  
Apartment demand was strong in Dallas-Fort Worth 
(DFW) and Houston in the third quarter. Rent growth 
firmed up close to its long-term average rate in DFW 
while rent increases in Houston remained sluggish. 
Apartment leasing stayed solid in Austin, with rent 
growth in the metro well above the U.S. average. 
Healthy demand along with a slowing pace of deliveries 
boosted rents in San Antonio. Apartment construction 
remained elevated, particularly in DFW. 
Reports on the office market indicated leasing continued 
to be active for new Class A space. Industrial demand 
and construction remained solid, although there was 
some concern about the high levels of construction in 
Houston.  
Financial Services 
Growth in loan demand and volumes picked up pace 
over the reporting period, led by particular strength in 
real estate lending. Volumes for commercial and industri-
al loans edged up, while consumer loan volumes de-
clined modestly. Credit standards tightened in all loan 
categories. Nearly half of contacts noted declining mar-
gins. Bankers reported that business activity improved 
further over the past six weeks, and outlooks were un-
changed. Bankers cite concerns regarding lower interest 
rates, the uncertain business climate, and political and 
trade tensions. 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District continued to 
erode, contributing to notable weakness in oilfield ser-
vices. However, oil and gas production continued to rise 
and well completion continued to increase in the Permi-
an Basin.  
According to contacts, the attacks on Saudi Arabian oil 
facilities did not change capital spending expectations in 
the oil and gas sector—it would take a lasting increase in 
the price of oil to influence those plans. Firms were 
slightly more pessimistic in their outlooks for the remain-
der of the year than they were during the previous re-
porting period thanks to spending cuts and a weaker 
economic outlook.  
Agriculture 
Hot and dry weather continued across most of the Dis-
trict, with some parts of Texas entering severe to ex-
treme drought. As a result, crop and pasture conditions 
deteriorated over the reporting period, though harvest 
was already well underway for row crops. Yields were 
favorable for much of the 2019 corn and sorghum crop, 
which at current crop prices has allowed many producers 
to cover their costs. Wheat and cotton yields were good 
but prices were below break-even levels. Contacts report 
a bearish outlook for cotton prices as export and domes-
tic demand estimates are being cut due to slower eco-
nomic growth, and supply estimates are not being cut as 
much as anticipated. Trade issues were still very promi-
nent on the minds of agricultural producers, however 
some contacts reported more optimism regarding a 
resolution. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded at a modest pace during the reporting period of mid-August through 
September. The labor market remained tight, employment growth was modest, and wages grew moderately. Reports on 
price inflation were mixed. Sales of retail goods increased modestly, and activity in consumer and business services 
expanded slightly. The pace of commerce in the manufacturing sector was little changed, and agriculture sector slowed 
further. Activity in residential and commercial real estate markets was solid. Lending grew further. 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market remained tight, and employment levels 
grew modestly on balance. Some contacts explicitly 
pointed to growing customer demand as the impetus for 
adding employees. In general, labor demand continued 
to outpace supply in sectors such as construction, fi-
nance, and hospitality. However, some businesses 
observed that they were able to add workers because 
labor shortages abated somewhat over the reporting 
period. In Washington, large e-commerce companies 
continued hiring to staff new distribution centers. A com-
munity bank in Oregon added positions in response to 
swifter lending activity. A restaurateur in Southern Cali-
fornia reported that a shortage of qualified workers re-
sulted in some restaurants reducing operating hours. A 
contact in Oregon reported that retail job growth was 
slightly negative year-on-year and that some manufac-
turers were unable to fill positions due to skills gaps. 
Wages continued to rise moderately across sectors. 
Labor shortages in construction boosted wages in that 
sector and resulted in longer lead times for projects. 
Contacts reported rising salaries for skilled information 
technology and software development personnel. A 
business services provider reported that wage growth 
has decelerated since last year, but is still very high by 
historical standards. Several contacts emphasized that 
rapid employee turnover continued to be a key challenge 
and was a driver of more generous retention-focused 
benefit packages and higher wage offers. In California, 
newly enacted legislation about the designation of inde-
pendent contractors as employees is expected to in-
crease labor costs for impacted companies significantly 
in the new year.        
Prices  
Reports on prices were mixed, but suggested that infla-
tion was stable or up slightly on balance. Contacts in a 
variety of sectors reported no noticeable change in pric-
ing over the reporting period. Some attributed this to 
brisk competition among businesses, which limited the 
ability to pass on higher labor costs to customers. Selling 
prices for some businesses in the logistics and profes-
sional services industries picked up moderately due to 
solid product demand, while inflation for health-care 
services jumped slightly. A few contacts observed higher 
fuel prices following supply disruptions in the Middle 
East. Building materials costs rose across the District, 
with some reports attributing this to a pickup in demand 
in the residential real estate market. However, lumber 
prices continued to run well below historical averages 
due to weak export demand, and some local areas saw 
declines in building material costs in response to limited 
construction activity. In the agriculture sector, crop prices 
softened overall due to weaker demand from abroad, 
though some products saw higher selling prices on net 
due to lower yields following poor growing conditions.   
The Beige Book ■ October 2019 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods increased modestly. Across the 
Mountain West, retailers reported that sales volumes 
rose moderately and margins were healthy even though 
consumer confidence about the outlook waned slightly 
on rising uncertainty. Sales at home improvement stores 
in Oregon were robust. In Arizona, retail sales were 
stable, while in Alaska, sales continued to decline and a 
large apparel retailer left the state. Businesses continued 
to observe consumer demand shift to e-commerce out-
lets from brick-and-mortar locations.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
expanded slightly. Health-care service providers in the 
Mountain West noted solid customer demand and the 
capacity to meet it. The restaurant industry in the Pacific 
Northwest was generally strong, with local tourism and 
rising incomes supporting spending. In Seattle, a contact 
noted that a new restaurant opened about every day, on 
average, though another contact at a quick service bev-
erage company in the area observed flat sales growth 
across locations. The tourism industry in Southern Cali-
fornia slowed somewhat, with a hotel owner reporting 
lower occupancy rates for that type of lodging.   
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector was little changed. A 
metals manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest reported 
steady activity across various product lines, while a 
contact in the semiconductor industry in California re-
ported that sales and inventory levels were normal. The 
slowing trend in both housing and global growth along 
with the stronger dollar generally constrained sales at 
domestic wood product manufacturers, though some 
noted that a recent tick up in the housing market stabi-
lized demand somewhat.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity slowed further in the agricultural sector. Poor 
weather in Idaho damaged wheat harvests, while potato 
yields were lower than last year due to poor growing 
conditions earlier in the season. The outlook for Idaho’s 
corn crop was similarly weak due to colder-than-usual 
conditions. Demand for agricultural exports continued to 
run soft, with contacts generally citing tariffs and slower 
global growth as reasons for the decline in exports. A 
lumber producer in Oregon noted that lumber exports to 
China have dropped so much that the industry has start-
ed scaling back harvesting capacity to preserve domes-
tic prices. An apple grower in Washington reported an 
oversupply of fruit in the market, and contacts in Califor-
nia noted that cherry and nut exports to China were 
down noticeably. Demand from abroad for various meat 
products was also weak due to tariffs, though a negative 
supply shock in the Chinese pork industry continued to 
drive stronger-than-usual demand for swine exports. A 
contact in California reported that demand for farmland 
has fallen recently due to realized and potential effects of 
trade policy developments, resulting in moderating land 
prices.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity was strong. Permitting for 
single- and multi-family homes picked up in most areas, 
though construction starts were constrained by a lack of 
labor and higher material costs, which led inventories to 
fall noticeably and lead times to increase. Accordingly, 
selling prices ticked up across the District as demand 
outpaced supply. An exception was in the Central Valley 
of California, where a contact reported that permitting 
was down and inventory levels increased more than 
expected. In areas such as eastern Washington and 
central Oregon, sales activity was brisk due to new buy-
ers arriving from higher-cost areas. A contact in the 
Mountain West reported that mortgage rates lower than 
earlier in the year spurred an increase in demand from 
formerly tepid levels.     
Activity in commercial real estate markets was also solid, 
and vacancy rates were generally low. In the Pacific 
Northwest, commercial permitting was especially brisk, 
and contacts there noted that construction would be 
centered on transportation infrastructure, health-care 
services, and public schools. In eastern Washington, 
rising demand for industrial space from the cannabis 
industry boosted leasing rates. In central Oregon, three 
of the largest commercial construction contractors were 
booked for projects through next year.   
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew solidly over the reporting period. 
Across the District, loan demand was brisk, supported by 
lower interest rates. Some banks reported that home 
mortgage refinancing activity increased further. Venture 
capital funding was strong in Seattle. Lenders to the 
agriculture sector in the Mountain West were concerned 
about weakness in that industry leading to loan defaults 
down the road. Generally, however, contacts reported 
that credit quality was healthy, with a few bankers noting 
slightly tighter underwriting standards. ■ 


