The Beige Book
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
May 30, 2018 
May 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
based on information collected on or before May 21, 2018. This docu-
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded moderately in late April and early May with few shifts in the pattern of growth. The Dallas 
District was an exception, where overall economic activity sped up to a solid pace. Manufacturing shifted into higher 
gear with more than half of the Districts reporting a pickup in industrial activity and a third of the Districts classifying 
activity as “strong.” Fabricated metals, heavy industrial machinery, and electronics equipment were noted as areas of 
strength. Rising goods production led to higher freight volumes for transportation firms. By contrast, consumer spend-
ing was soft. Nonauto retail sales growth moderated somewhat and auto sales were flat, although there was considera-
ble variation by District and vehicle type. In banking, demand for loans ticked higher and banks reported that increased 
competition had led to higher deposit rates. Delinquency rates were mostly stable at low levels. Homebuilding and 
home sales increased modestly, on net, and nonresidential construction continued at a moderate pace. Contacts noted 
some concern about the uncertainty of international trade policy. Still, outlooks for near term growth were generally 
upbeat. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment rose at a modest to moderate rate across most Districts. Again, the Dallas District was the exception, 
where solid and widespread employment growth was reported. Labor market conditions remained tight across the 
country, and contacts continued to report difficulty filling positions across skill levels. Shortages of qualified workers 
were reported in various specialized trades and occupations, including truck drivers, sales personnel, carpenters, elec-
tricians, painters, and information technology professionals. Many firms responded to talent shortages by increasing 
wages as well as the generosity of their compensation packages. In the aggregate, however, wage increases remained 
modest in most Districts. Contacts in some Districts expected similar employment and wage gains in the coming 
months. 
Prices 
Prices rose moderately in most Districts, while the remainder reported slight or modest increases. There were several 
reports of rising materials costs, notably for steel, aluminum, oil, oil derivatives, lumber, and cement. A few Districts 
noted that these reports of rising materials costs were becoming more common across contacts. Input cost increases, 
along with labor shortages in some sectors and strengthening demand, put upward pressure on prices in the transpor-
tation, construction, and manufacturing sectors. Some Districts also noted that their retail contacts were more able to 
pass along price increases to their customers than in the recent past.   
Boston 
Business activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace, with contacted manufacturers, retailers, and most 
staffing firms reporting year-over-year increases in reve-
nues. While some firms said prices were increasing 
more than last year, others indicated no unusual pres-
sure. Most hiring firms noted tight labor markets; some—
including staffing firms—said wages were rising. 
 
New York 
Economic growth continued at a modest pace, while 
labor markets have tightened further. Input price pres-
sures have broadened, and selling price increases have 
picked up somewhat. Housing markets have firmed 
slightly, while commercial real estate markets have 
softened.  
 
 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest pace. 
Wage pressures were emerging in some tighter labor 
markets, but wage and price increases remained modest 
overall, as did job growth. Notably, nonfinancial services 
accelerated to a moderate pace, and auto sales ap-
peared to reverse several periods of decline, posting a 
slight increase.  
Cleveland 
The District economy expanded at a moderate pace. 
Labor markets tightened, with wage pressures noted 
broadly. Rising commodities prices and transportation 
costs are pressuring goods producers. Stronger confi-
dence in the economy boosted demand in manufactur-
ing, banking, and nonfinancial services. Consumer de-
mand increased modestly. Construction activity re-
mained robust. 
Richmond 
The regional economy expanded moderately. Robust 
demand and a shortage of drivers led some trucking 
firms to turn away business which, in turn, increased 
demand for rail services. Home sales were steady, while 
inventories remained limited. Labor demand continued to 
strengthen and supply remained tight across industries. 
Prices rose moderately, overall.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity grew at a modest pace. Tightness 
continued in the labor market with firms noting increased 
efforts to attract and retain workers. Reports of wage 
growth were mixed. Overall retail sales rose and light 
truck sales were robust. Real estate activity improved 
slightly. Manufacturers noted increases in new orders 
and production. Loan growth remained firm. 
Chicago 
Growth in economic activity continued at a moderate 
pace. Manufacturing increased strongly, employment 
grew moderately, consumer and business spending rose 
modestly, and construction and real estate increased 
slightly. Wages and prices increased modestly and 
financial conditions improved modestly. The outlook for 
farm income brightened. 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions improved slightly. Wage growth 
was moderate. Some firms have begun relaxing drug-
testing standards and restrictions on hiring felons to 
alleviate labor shortages. District bankers reported weak-
er demand for new loans and a decline in creditworthi-
ness of loan applicants. Firms surveyed in mid-May were 
slightly less optimistic about the rest of 2018 as those 
surveyed in mid-February. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity increased moderately. 
While labor demand appeared robust, employment 
growth was restrained by a tight labor supply. Wage 
growth was moderate, while price pressures increased 
slightly, particularly at the wholesale level. District manu-
facturers were experiencing robust growth but also were 
experiencing supply-chain disruptions as a result of 
uncertainty over trade policy. 
Kansas City 
Overall economic activity in the Tenth District increased 
moderately, with further growth expected in coming 
months. Manufacturing activity expanded at a rapid 
pace, while consumer spending, energy, and business 
services grew moderately. Agricultural conditions weak-
ened but at a slower pace, while District employment 
and wages rose modestly. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew at a solid pace, with an accelera-
tion in manufacturing activity. Expansion in the services, 
energy, and real estate sectors continued at about the 
same pace. Retail spending was mixed and drought 
conditions persisted in parts of the District. Hiring re-
mained solid despite a tight labor market, and wage and 
price pressures stayed elevated. Contacts expressed 
concern about trade uncertainty and rising interest rates, 
although outlooks overall remained positive. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Sales of retail goods edged 
up, and activity in the consumer and business services 
sectors expanded slightly. Activity in the manufacturing 
sector was solid. Activity in residential real estate mar-
kets remained solid, and conditions in the commercial 
real estate sector picked up notably. Lending activity 
ticked up modestly. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
First District economic activity continued to expand at a moderate pace, with all responding retailers and manufacturers 
citing year-over-year increases in sales and revenues in recent periods; nearly all staffing firms also reported revenue 
growth. Residential real estate markets saw price increases and mixed sales results, still largely attributed to very lim-
ited inventories of homes. Commercial real estate markets were mostly improved since the last report, or at least 
steady. Some firms, including staffing firms, cited pick-ups in wages; most noted ongoing difficulty finding workers. One 
retailer cited vendor-price increases of about 3 percent, which they intended to pass along to customers; manufacturers 
noted no unusual price pressures although some were concerned about future effects on prices of tariffs or other chang-
es in trade policy. Outlooks continued to be positive.  
Employment and Wages  
Many responding firms have done some hiring; most 
reported tight labor markets and modest increases in 
pay. Retail contacts reported that labor supply is tight for 
some skills, like IT, and in some regions. All contacted 
manufacturers were hiring or maintaining current levels 
of employment; they said hiring was not unusually diffi-
cult. A contact in the semiconductor industry said the 
firm was giving 6 percent raises to engineers and 3 
percent to the rest of the staff. A contact in industrial 
distribution said that finding salespeople was hard, while 
a milk producer said truckers were in short supply. All 
staffing-firm respondents reported increased labor de-
mand across industries and occupations stemming from 
both new job creation and increased vacancies from job 
switchers. Labor supply continued to present a challenge 
to most staffing firms, increasing search costs and leav-
ing many unfilled jobs. All staffing contacts said that both 
bill rates and pay rates were rising significantly.  
Prices  
Most respondents reported modest upward movements 
in prices. One retail firm, which noted that prices were 
largely flat in 2017, reported recently seeing higher 
prices from manufacturers and wholesalers that it is 
passing through as higher retail prices; the increases 
averaged 3¼ percent. Most of these vendor price in-
creases were attributed to higher steel prices and to high 
oil prices. Two retail contacts specifically noted that 
higher fuel prices and a shortage of truck drivers were 
contributing to higher shipping costs. Manufacturing 
contacts did not report any unusual pricing pressure. 
Even a contact who said that his firm was having trouble 
finding components said that although prices were up, 
there was no gouging. Contacts expressed concern 
about tariffs, with one manufacturer saying he expected 
prices of certain inputs to rise 15 percent to 20 percent. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts consulted for this round all reported year-
over-year gains in their most recent comparable-store 
sales, with growth ranging from mid-single-digit to double
-digit increases. Some contacts reported that in-store 
customer traffic continued to decline, while online and e-
commerce sales were up. Nonetheless, the retail outlook 
was positive, with firms reporting that they plan to contin-
ue to make multiyear investments in their businesses.  
A contact in the travel industry reported that Boston’s 
Logan International Airport continued to see robust in-
creases in passenger counts. Scheduled airline seats 
increased year-over-year in recent months and total 
passenger traffic was up 4.1 percent in 2018:Q1 com-
pared with 2017:Q1, with domestic passengers increas-
ing 4.6 percent and international traffic up 1.5 percent. 
Cruise traffic in Boston has also increased significantly, 
both as a home port and as a port-of-call. The outlook for 
tourism to Boston and New England was reported to be 
bullish. 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
All eight responding manufacturing firms reported higher 
sales, with strength across many sectors. A contact in 
the industrial distribution business said that activity had 
finally recovered from the 2014 fall in oil prices, reporting 
that increased demand was broad-based but energy was 
playing a large role either directly or indirectly. Technolo-
gy firms also reported strong sales. A manufacturer of 
transformers for big-ticket electronic devices described 
enormous difficulty finding components and said they 
were keeping inventories at twice normal levels to en-
sure that they could keep their lines running.  
No manufacturing contacts cited revisions to their capital 
expenditure plans. Two reported major share repurchase 
programs. The outlook was positive for all respondents 
this cycle. The major concern manufacturers expressed 
was trade policy. Some worried about the effects of 
tariffs on their costs, while a maker of testing equipment 
said they might move some production to Europe to 
avoid Chinese retaliation against the United States. 
Staffing Services  
New England staffing firms have experienced an up-
surge in business during the second quarter to date, with 
nearly all reporting revenue growth, both year-over-year 
and quarter-over-quarter. Reports were mixed on wheth-
er labor shortages were greater in skilled or unskilled 
occupations, but most said that temporary positions had 
been difficult to fill without the possibility of permanent 
hire at the end of the assignment; at the same time, 
clients were reportedly becoming more likely to retain 
temporary hires for permanent positions to avoid search 
costs later on. Respondents said they were increasing 
referral bonuses and professional development opportu-
nities in order to build networks and long-term relation-
ships with workers. Looking forward, contacts expressed 
optimism: Many expected a short-term boost from a 
seasonal influx of college graduates and students look-
ing for temporary summer work; on a longer horizon, 
most expected current labor market conditions to contin-
ue, bringing both the great opportunity of strong demand 
and the difficulty of sparse labor supply.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate markets held steady or improved 
modestly in the First District. Office leasing activity was 
described as decent in Providence and Portland, robust 
in greater Boston, and light in Hartford. Effective office 
rents were up 2 percent to 3 percent in Providence over 
the past six months, and office rents continued to rise 
modestly in Boston. Office vacancy rates were down 
from a year ago in Boston, Providence, and Portland, 
and flat in Hartford. With the exception of Connecticut, 
industrial leasing and sales demand remained strong. 
Boston contacts noted that office construction—including 
speculative construction— is set to increase but the 
extent of the increase was uncertain because most 
projects were still in the planning stages. Other new 
construction included hotel projects in Portland and 
Providence, student housing in Providence, offices in 
downtown Portland, apartments in suburban Portland, 
and numerous small condominium developments around 
the region. Investment sales demand was seen as stable 
in Boston and strengthening in Providence. Although the 
outlook for Connecticut remained weak, most contacts 
were optimistic that commercial real estate market condi-
tions would remain favorable.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District saw 
mixed sales results. (Rhode Island, Massachusetts, 
Maine, and Vermont reported year-over-year changes 
from March 2017 to March 2018, while Greater Boston 
and New Hampshire reported changes through April 
2018. An ongoing technical issue made recent data for 
Connecticut unavailable.) For single-family homes, 
closed sales increased in Boston and New Hampshire 
but decreased in Rhode Island, Massachusetts as a 
whole, and Maine. For condos, closed sales increased in 
Rhode Island, Boston, and New Hampshire, while Mas-
sachusetts as a whole saw a decrease. Vermont report-
ed that closed sales declined for single-family homes 
and condos combined. Inventory decreased in all areas. 
Median sales prices increased in all reporting areas. Al-
though rising prices are favorable for construction, con-
tacts noted that homebuilders in New England faced 
many obstacles. A Massachusetts contact mentioned 
high costs, legislative hurdles, difficulties in acquiring 
land, and the need for approval from local governments, 
which made it very hard for homebuilders to enter new 
markets. Contacts expressed a generally positive out-
look for activity in the coming months. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has continued to grow at a modest pace. The labor market has shown further 
signs of tightening, with some reports of accelerating wages. Input price increases have become increasingly wide-
spread, and consumer price inflation appears to have picked up slightly. Growth has remained fairly brisk in the manu-
facturing sector and has picked up somewhat in the service industries. Consumer spending has been steady to stronger 
in April and early May, buoyed by increased tourism. Housing markets have firmed slightly, while commercial real estate 
markets have shown scattered signs of slackening. Finally, banks continued to report rising loan demand and no 
change in delinquency rates.    
Employment and Wages  
Hiring has picked up somewhat, as the labor market has 
continued to tighten. A major employment agency in 
upstate New York reported that workers in skilled trades 
and information technology are in particularly short sup-
ply. A New York City agency noted labor shortages 
across a broad array of occupations and industries, with 
reasonably qualified job candidates receiving multiple 
offers and getting snapped up quickly. Labor shortages 
in upstate New York were attributed, in part, to an aging 
workforce. 
Business contacts in finance and information continued 
to report fairly brisk hiring, while wholesalers and leisure 
& hospitality businesses noted moderate hiring. Firms in 
manufacturing, health & education, and professional & 
business services reported modest staffing increases, 
while retailers and transportation firms noted flat to de-
clining employment. Looking ahead, contacts in finance 
and real estate planned to hire more briskly than those in 
other sectors.   
Wage growth has remained modest across upstate New 
York but has picked up in and around New York City. 
While businesses in education & health services report-
ed subdued wage increases, contacts across all other 
major service industries reported increasing wage pres-
sures.          
Prices  
Businesses in most industry sectors reported increasing-
ly widespread hikes in input prices—particularly in manu-
facturing, wholesale trade, and leisure & hospitality. 
Contacts in almost all industry sectors anticipated further 
increases in the months ahead.  
Wholesalers report widespread hikes in selling prices, 
while those in other sectors reported more moderate 
increases. Still, retailers in both upstate New York and 
the New York City area noted that they have been less 
aggressive in discounting merchandise in recent weeks, 
boosting effective sales prices. New York City hotels and 
Broadway theaters have reportedly raised prices some-
what in recent weeks, with Broadway theater ticket pric-
es up more than 10 percent from a year earlier. Looking 
ahead, businesses generally said they planned moder-
ate price increases.      
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were steady to stronger across the District in 
April and May. Retailers reported a noticeable pickup in 
sales in New York City, part of which was attributed to 
increased tourism. One retail chain noted that sales 
moved ahead of plan in recent weeks. In contrast, retail-
ers in upstate New York indicated that sales were little 
changed, despite fairly brisk customer traffic, and a few 
store closings were reported. Inventories were generally 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
reported to be at satisfactory levels, and retailers were 
moderately optimistic about the near-term outlook.  
New vehicle sales in upstate New York weakened in 
April and early May and fell well short of comparable 
2017 levels. In contrast, sales of used cars picked up. 
Vehicle inventories were said to be at or somewhat 
above desired levels. Dealers continued to characterize 
retail and wholesale credit conditions as favorable. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) climbed in April, reaching its highest level in 
almost two decades.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported continued solid growth in busi-
ness since the last report. Transportation firms noted a 
modest pickup in activity, while wholesalers indicated a 
fairly brisk increase. Looking ahead, manufacturers 
remained generally optimistic about the near-term out-
look, though less so than earlier in the year. Wholesalers 
and transportation firms remained fairly optimistic.       
Services 
Reports from service-sector firms continued to indicate 
modest, if any, growth in activity. Contacts in profession-
al & business services and leisure & hospitality reported 
modest growth, while those in the information sector 
reported activity was flat. Businesses in health & educa-
tion services noted modest declines in activity, on bal-
ance. Looking ahead, professional & business service 
and information firms indicated that they were fairly 
optimistic about the near-term outlook.  
Tourism in New York City has picked up further since the 
last report. Broadway theaters reported a pickup in both 
attendance and especially revenues, and retailers at-
tributed some of a recent pickup in sales to increased 
tourism. New York City hotels noted an increase in occu-
pancy rates and revenue per available room, even with a 
growing number of available hotel rooms.           
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, a bit firmer since the last report. Real 
estate activity in both the Buffalo and Rochester areas 
picked up noticeably, as strong demand, combined with 
lean inventories of homes on the market, have driven up 
prices and sparked increasingly widespread bidding 
wars. Low and declining inventories have also held down 
sales volume and driven up prices in downstate New 
York and southwestern Connecticut. Manhattan has 
been the exception: Inventories have been at moderate 
levels and edging up, and both sales activity and sales 
prices have declined modestly. Though its effect on the 
market is not yet clear, there is some concern about the 
new federal tax legislation reducing the deductibility of 
homeowner expenses.  
The rental market has been mixed as well. Apartment 
rents have risen modestly across northern New Jersey, 
the Lower Hudson Valley, and upstate New York but 
have been flat across most of New York City, with record 
high landlord concessions. One exception has been The 
Bronx, where rents have risen fairly briskly. Throughout 
most of the region, the higher end of both the sales and 
rental market has continued to be relatively soft.  
Commercial real estate markets have slackened some-
what overall. Office rents edged down in New York City 
and Long Island, while availability rates edged up and 
leasing activity slowed. Office rents and availability rates 
have been mostly steady across upstate New York and 
northern New Jersey, though leasing activity has slowed 
slightly. The market for retail space has also continued to 
soften across much of the District, though it has been 
steady across upstate New York. The industrial market, 
which had grown increasingly tight over the past year, 
has leveled off across much of the District, though it has 
continued to strengthen in northern New Jersey. A real 
estate industry contact noted that high rents and dimin-
ishing availability of industrial and warehouse space in 
New York City’s outer boroughs has driven many busi-
nesses to relocate to northern and central New Jersey. 
New multi-family construction starts have been steady to 
down slightly across the District. New industrial develop-
ment has slowed as well, and new office construction 
has virtually ground to a halt, except in northern New 
Jersey, though it has slowed there as well. In all these 
categories, however, there continues to be a substantial 
volume of space under construction.        
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
higher demand for residential mortgages, commercial 
mortgages, and C&I loans, but unchanged demand for 
consumer loans and decreased refinancing activity. 
Banks reported tighter credit standards for consumer 
loans but unchanged standards across all other catego-
ries. Loan spreads narrowed for residential mortgages 
and C&I loans. Widespread increases were reported in 
average deposit rates. Finally, bankers reported un-
changed delinquency rates across all loan categories. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Nonfinancial services appeared to accelerate to a moderate pace, and manufacturing activity continued to grow 
moderately. Meanwhile, nonauto retail sales, tourist activity, and nonresidential leasing markets continued at a modest 
pace. Contacts from new home construction and nonresidential construction reported no change in activity. Following 
several periods of decline, auto sales appeared to have increased slightly, while existing home sales continued to de-
cline moderately. On balance, employment, wages, and prices continued to grow modestly. However, many contacts 
raised concerns about rising oil prices and prices for commodities linked to tariffs. The growth outlook over the next six 
months remained positive, with over half of all firms anticipating increases in general activity. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. Manufacturing and non-
manufacturing firms reported ongoing net additions to 
staff; however, hiring has broadened among manufactur-
ers and narrowed among nonmanufacturers since last 
period. Average hours worked rose over the period for 
manufacturing firms and nonmanufacturers.  
On balance, wages also continued growing modestly, 
although reports have risen of firms losing skilled em-
ployees to competitors and struggling to attract and 
retain new qualified workers. Increasingly, firms are 
responding by adjusting their wage structures. The share 
of nonmanufacturing firms reporting increases remained 
greater than 40 percent. Banking contacts noted few 
signs of general wage inflation.  
Staffing firms continued to report steady demand for 
temporary workers and direct hires in several local labor 
markets, with increased wage pressures in the tightest 
markets. According to one contact, clients are hiring 
faster now compared with a few years ago when they 
were indecisive about whether to hire and whom.  
 
Prices  
While reports of rising prices are becoming more wide-
spread, on balance, price increases remained modest. 
Among nonmanufacturing firms, one-third reported in-
creases for prices paid, and less than one-fourth report-
ed increases for prices received – about the same as the 
prior period. Reports of price increases were more wide-
spread among manufacturing firms this period, with over 
half noting higher prices paid and over one-third indicat-
ing higher prices received for their own goods.  
Builders continued to report rising prices, particularly for 
materials containing lumber, steel, and oil derivatives. 
Several manufacturers (and their bankers) cited rising 
prices for aluminum ingot, steel, and oil – some passed 
along the costs; however, margins shrank for others.  
Looking ahead one year, nonmanufacturing firms antici-
pated receiving significantly higher prices for their own 
goods and services – a moderate increase from one 
quarter earlier. Manufacturing firms expected even high-
er prices, reflecting a small increase from their expecta-
tions last quarter. Overall, firms also reported slightly 
higher expectations for annual consumer inflation.  
 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity maintained a moder-
ate pace of growth. Nearly half of the firms reported an 
increase in new orders, and somewhat fewer reported an 
increase in shipments – just a slight drop from the prior 
period. Moreover, the percentage of firms that reported a 
decrease in new orders fell by half since last period.  
The makers of lumber products, paper products, fabricat-
ed metal products, industrial machinery, and electronic 
equipment tended to note gains in new orders and ship-
ments; the makers of chemicals and primary metals 
reported mixed results. One primary metal manufacturer 
felt that the current slowdown was due to “customers 
waiting for clarity on the issue of steel tariffs.”  
Manufacturing contacts continued to expect general 
activity to increase over the next six months; however, 
the percentage of firms expecting future increases 
dropped below 50 percent. The percentage of firms 
expecting increases in future employment rose to nearly 
one-half, but for future capital expenditures, the percent-
age fell to less than one-third.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales continued to grow 
modestly. Mall retailers noted sales gains across nearly 
all categories. As gas prices neared $3 a gallon in parts 
of Pennsylvania, one contact noted concern but saw no 
negative impact on spending yet.  
Pennsylvania auto dealers reported year-over-year gains 
in sales for April, while New Jersey reported declines. 
Dealers in both states noted that sales in early May 
appeared stronger; however, year-to-date sales are still 
a bit below last year’s very high levels.  
Tourism contacts continued to report modest growth 
overall. A Philadelphia analyst cited gains in hotel occu-
pancy despite absorbing new supply. Shore contacts are 
generally optimistic for the summer season ahead. Atlan-
tic City’s casino revenues fell on a year-over-year basis 
in March and April.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms reported moderate 
growth in general activity – an uptick from the modest 
pace of the prior Beige Book period. In particular, the 
percentage of firms reporting increases in sales rose, 
and the percentage reporting increases in new orders 
rose significantly. A contact from one large firm also 
noted that the delinquency rate on customers’ accounts 
remained steady and very low. Expectations of future 
growth remained high, in fact, the percentage of firms 
anticipating increased activity rose over 60 percent. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported slight growth in overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards). Volumes grew moder-
ately in mortgages and modestly in commercial and 
industrial lending. However, these gains were offset by 
slight declines in commercial real estate lending, home 
equity lines, and auto loans, and by a moderate decline 
in other consumer loans (not elsewhere classified). 
Compared with one year earlier, loans grew modestly, 
and in all categories except for home equity lines.  
During the current period, credit card lending began 
growing at a moderate pace – ending its long seasonal 
decline. However, credit card loan volumes have grown 
moderately when compared with the same period last 
year.  
Banking contacts continued to describe credit standards 
as unchanged, credit quality as sound, and consumer 
sentiment and business confidence as high and growing. 
Numerous bankers noted growing pressure to raise 
deposit rates, especially from municipal clients.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported little overall change in sales and 
construction activity. A banking contact noted that a 
former local builder is now earning more by renovating 
existing homes and managing the rentals.  
Sales of existing homes continued to fall moderately in 
most major Third District markets compared with the 
same period last year. Brokers continued to blame a lack 
of new listings for moderately priced homes.  
Overall, nonresidential real estate contacts reported no 
change in high levels of construction activity and in the 
modest growth in leasing activity. Construction of indus-
trial warehouse space continued apace – “a frenzy,” 
according to one banking contact – faster than the labor 
supply, according to another banker. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District expanded at a moderate pace as customer demand held steady and confidence 
remained high. Hiring improved slightly, though it remained moderate. Contacts continue to report difficulty finding quali-
fied candidates in a broad array of occupations. Employers are raising wages to attract talent, but the increments are 
moderate and in line with recent trends in the District. Rising commodity prices, especially for lumber and steel, are 
pressuring goods producers. Construction firms and transportation companies were generally successful at raising their 
selling prices. Also, retailers managed to increase their prices to cover higher fuel costs. Consumer demand, including 
for autos, was stable to slightly higher. Housing and commercial real estate markets remained strong, although builders 
are increasingly concerned about rising input costs. Manufacturing output trended higher. 
Employment and Wages  
Hiring in the District improved slightly, though the pace 
remained moderate. Contacts generally reported stable 
demand for their products and stronger confidence, 
which resulted in fewer firms reducing headcount. The 
majority of firms reported replacing staff or making sea-
sonal adjustments. The nonresidential construction 
sector was a standout, as high project volumes motivat-
ed the majority of builders to add workers. Overall, con-
tacts reported continued difficulty finding qualified candi-
dates across a broad array of occupations. Neverthe-
less, no meaningful changes to wage pressures were 
noted. In general, employers are raising wages to stay 
competitive, but the increases are in line with recent 
trends in the District.  
Prices  
Input price increases gained momentum, especially for 
construction materials. Builders widely noted ongoing 
lumber cost increases. Also, the threat of tariffs was 
reported as having led to hikes in steel prices. To a 
lesser extent, cement price increases were also noted. 
As with builders, manufacturers observed similar up-
swings in metals prices and added rising transportation 
costs to their list of concerns. Overall, firms’ ability to 
pass along input price increases to their customers did 
not change much from the previous survey period, alt-
hough there were notable shifts within industries. Pricing 
power for banks fell sharply, which contacts attributed to 
heightened competition. However, an increasing share of 
construction contacts were able to pass along their in-
creased costs, thanks to strong demand and higher 
backlogs. Retailers, who had been holding their prices 
steady for a long stretch of time, managed to raise their 
selling prices recently to cover higher fuel costs. Trans-
portation companies across the board raised freight 
rates, as they have been doing in recent months, without 
pushback from customers.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer demand increased modestly during the sur-
vey period. Seasonal factors aside, clothing retailers, 
department stores, and food retailers noted stable de-
mand. Retail sales activity in the District was reported to 
be in line with or weaker than activity seen throughout 
the United States. One grocery chain operator noted that 
population loss in his region and increased use of alter-
natives to physical store locations had led to weaker 
regional sales activity relative to the rest of the country. 
Looking ahead to the next several months, most re-
spondents expect stable demand. However, uncertainty 
surrounding tariffs on Chinese imports is a source of 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
concern for some retailers that have operations overseas 
or use imported goods as inputs.  
In the auto industry, customer demand improved mod-
estly, thanks to improving labor markets, better weather, 
and higher consumer confidence. Furthermore, most 
auto dealers expect customer demand to remain stable 
going into the next quarter. Some auto dealers reported 
weaker sales in the region relative to the rest of the 
country, a situation which they partly attributed to pro-
longed cold weather conditions. Additionally, some auto 
dealers indicated that lenders are tightening credit and 
that loan and lease payments made by consumers are 
rising because of higher interest rates.  
Manufacturing 
Most contacts in manufacturing indicated that demand 
was better during the past two months because of strong 
consumer confidence, seasonal factors, and the fear of 
future price increases leading to accelerated purchasing. 
Many fabricated metals and durable goods producers 
noted increased demand for heavy machinery and other 
capital goods. Some even moved up capital expendi-
tures and plant expansions to keep up with increasing 
demand. Extractive industries, transportation equipment, 
and agriculture were noted as strong end markets. Be-
cause of trade-related price increases, most contacts did 
not believe that this strong demand would continue 
during the remainder of 2018. Finished goods invento-
ries were down because of increased demand and un-
certainty about future prices. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported that overall customer demand 
was either steady or improving and that current trends 
are expected to continue into the next few months. A 
stronger job market, higher mortgage rates, and rising 
home prices were noted as enabling and motivating 
purchases. Financing conditions for homebuilders were 
reported to be stable. Real estate agents noted stable 
demand for first-time home purchases and Section 8 
vouchers. Some contacts reported increases in housing 
inventory. Sales of homes in the lower price range 
strengthened, according to some contacts, while sales of 
higher-priced homes softened. Financing conditions for 
homebuyers remain generally stable.  
Business conditions for nonresidential builders improved 
from what was an already strong environment. Contacts 
noted decreased uncertainty and pent-up demand as 
supporting activity and leading to increased backlogs. 
One contact noted his company had a record month for 
contracts because of manufacturing and distribution 
projects. Another contact noted a recent uptick in de-
mand for speculative lease products.  
Financial Services 
Bankers reported stronger demand for financial services 
as construction lending, home equity lines, and mort-
gage activity picked up with the warmer weather. De-
mand for commercial credit increased as customers 
drew down cash reserves at the beginning of the year 
and pivoted back to relying on credit. Business confi-
dence remained high, and some contacts reported that 
their customers increased their capital expenditures. 
Core deposits increased over the past two months. In 
some areas, deposit increases were driven by royalty 
checks and bonuses from increased shale activity. That 
aside, most contacts cited seasonal changes following 
tax filing season as boosting deposits. Businesses that 
had drawn down deposits to pay taxes at the beginning 
of the year have since increased their balances, while 
many consumers received refund checks that they have 
yet to spend. In addition, one contact noted that in-
creased competitive pressure had led to higher deposit 
rates and special incentives to win deposits from non-
bank competitors.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms reported strong demand, 
thanks to generally favorable economic conditions. Nota-
bly, transportation firms cited an uptick in industrial pro-
duction, construction, and activity in the energy industry 
as leading to higher freight volumes. Railroad contacts 
attributed some of their volume growth to ongoing capac-
ity constraints in the trucking industry. Within the profes-
sional services sector, business advisory firms and soft-
ware developers reported the strongest activity, which 
they attributed to improved business earnings, profits, 
and confidence. One contact noted increasing digital 
transactions as driving demand for his firm’s software. A 
number of professional services firms reported boosting 
their capital investments, namely for cybersecurity and IT 
infrastructure. ■ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate pace in recent weeks. Manufacturing conditions improved moderate-
ly and port activity remained strong. Trucking demand remained robust, and driver shortages have led some trucking 
companies to turn some business away. As a result, some shippers turned to rail. Reports from retailers were mixed as 
furniture and equipment sales picked up but new car sales declined. Travel and tourism remained strong, despite some 
adverse weather limiting outdoor recreation. Residential real estate markets improved modestly as home sales were 
steady, while inventories remained limited. Commercial real estate leasing activity increased, particularly for retail and 
industrial space. Overall, loan demand grew modestly and competition for deposits intensified. Nonfinancial services 
firms reported a modest rise in demand. Natural gas and coal production picked up in recent weeks while agriculture 
reports were mixed. The demand for labor continued to strengthen while supply remained tight across industry sectors. 
Prices rose moderately; firms reported rising steel and aluminum prices and increasing transportation costs.    
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand continued to strengthen moderately in 
recent weeks, while supply remained tight across indus-
try sectors. Employment agencies noted a slight de-
crease in job openings compared to the strong spring 
recruiting levels. Staffing firms reported increased de-
mand for warehouse managers, customer service repre-
sentatives, and medical and legal professionals. Mean-
while, business owners reported difficulty filling positions 
for carpenters, machinists, electricians, engineers, truck 
drivers, IT professionals, and construction workers. 
Wage increases remained modest across sectors, but a 
few firms reported increased wage pressures.  
Prices  
On the whole, prices grew at a moderate rate since the 
previous Beige Book. According to our most recent 
surveys, manufacturers reported moderate growth in 
input prices while selling prices rose at a more modest 
pace. Manufacturers saw input prices rise for steel and 
aluminum, corrugated boxes, specialty chemicals, paint, 
and hardware. Additionally, rail and truck transportation 
prices moved higher. Homebuilders continued to report 
higher prices for raw materials and for land and lots. 
Service sector price growth remained modest, overall, 
but firms expected prices to rise at faster pace over the 
next six months. Metallurgical coal prices were little 
changed in recent weeks while thermal coal prices rose 
slightly.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing business conditions improved moderately.  
A cabinet manufacturer attributed an increase in demand 
to companies beginning to spend more after the tax cuts. 
A Virginia engine manufacturer said that high demand 
was causing the firm to produce as fast as it could get 
raw materials. Meanwhile, a West Virginia wood prod-
ucts manufacturer reported record business but thin 
profit margins because of high costs of lumber and rising 
trucking prices. Many manufacturers continued to ex-
press concerns about the negative impact that rising 
steel prices could have on their businesses, and a North 
Carolina door frame manufacturer anticipated a bad year 
because of high aluminum costs.  
Ports and Transportation 
Activity at District ports remained robust in recent weeks 
as contacts reported record volumes and expectations 
for continued strength. One port executive said that 
volumes remained strong despite some volatility in ship-
ments resulting from delays at other east coast ports. 
Increasing shipments led one port to increase loading 
hours for trucks, but it still had to shift more of its vol-
umes to rail as truck capacity dwindled. At least one port 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018

E-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  
was investing in more terminals with the expectation that 
strong year-over-year volume increases will continue 
well into the future. 
Trucking remained strong in recent weeks as companies 
struggled to meet the high demand with a shortage of 
drivers. A Virginia trucking company said they were 
investing in better equipment in an effort to recruit driv-
ers. Meanwhile, a North Carolina trucking company 
reported quadrupling rates for high-risk customers in 
order to ease demand but found that some customers 
were willing to pay the new rates. Higher shipping rates 
allowed trucking companies to increase profits despite 
rising labor costs. Many shippers had to turn to rail as 
trucking firms turned them away. A Virginia rail company 
reported seeing record profits so far this year but also 
struggled to keep up with demand.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retailers reported mixed business conditions recently. A 
Virginia hardware store said that sales were volatile, 
which was largely weather-related, but a West Virginia 
equipment company reported record high sales. A Vir-
ginia furniture store saw strong business but struggled 
with high inventory. Several retailers expressed con-
cerns about future profits because of rising steel and 
labor costs. Auto dealers in North Carolina and Virginia 
reported weakening sales, particularly in new cars, as 
high prices and rising interest rates reduced affordability. 
Travel and tourism activity remained strong, overall, in 
recent weeks despite some adverse weather conditions. 
For example, a Virginia resort reported strong bookings 
despite the weather but low participation in outdoor 
activities. Graduations brought business to many hotels 
and leisure travel picked up in Washington, D.C. In 
Charleston, South Carolina, hotels and restaurants saw 
stronger sales but were concerned about the number of 
new establishments scheduled to open in the next year. 
Despite reporting high revenue, a West Virginia adven-
ture center expressed worries about low state tourism 
funding.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales increased modestly in recent weeks. District 
Realtors reported that single family inventories remained 
low, new listings continued to sell quickly, and traffic was 
slightly lower. A Washington, D.C., agent saw more 
homes selling before being listed, and the median days 
on the market declined to just eight days. In other areas, 
average days on the market edged down further from 
existing low levels, while home prices continued to rise 
modestly. New home sales and construction slowed 
slightly as overburdened subcontractors were slowing 
down new home production. However, in most markets, 
new residential development picked up in recent weeks.  
Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately in re-
cent weeks as brokers reported strong demand for retail 
and industrial space; however, reports on office demand 
were mixed. Vacancy rates remained low across mar-
kets, while rental rates were reportedly stable to increas-
ing modestly. Commercial sales rose modestly, accord-
ing to a few brokers, with warehouse and industrial build-
ing sites representing the majority of transactions. Com-
mercial construction increased modestly in some re-
gions. Multifamily leasing remained healthy in most 
markets.  
Banking and Finance 
Since our previous beige book, loan demand grew mod-
estly. Overall, bankers said that consumer demand was 
increasing at a healthy rate; however, reports on de-
mand for business and commercial loans were mixed. In 
the District on the whole, residential mortgage demand 
grew at a modest pace. Deposit rates increased, and 
contacts reported that competition for deposits had inten-
sified. Credit quality remained strong while credit stand-
ards were generally unchanged. Interest rates rose 
slightly in recent weeks.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Overall, the demand for nonfinancial services rose mod-
estly in recent weeks. Demand strengthened for ware-
house and storage leasing and for management and 
administrative support services. Creative services, such 
as marketing, also saw stronger activity. Meanwhile, 
demand softened for telecom services, health and social 
services, and for some professional and business ser-
vices that rely on federal spending.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Natural gas production rose moderately and pipeline 
construction picked up since our previous report. Coal 
production increased slightly as coal exporting was 
buoyed by supply disruptions in Australia. Agricultural 
reports were mixed as poultry demand rose but dairy 
farm activity declined. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts reported that economic activity continued at a modest pace from April through mid-May. 
The outlook among contacts remains optimistic with most firms expecting modest growth to continue over the next three 
to six months. District firms still report difficulties finding candidates across a broad range of industries and skills, and 
reports of wage pressure varied widely based on geography and job type. Most nonlabor input cost pressures were 
subdued; however, there were reports of rising steel and aluminum prices as a result of the new tariffs. On balance, 
District merchants reported a slight increase in sales levels since the previous report, and auto dealers noted light trucks 
sales were solid. The tourism sector continued to note positive activity. According to residential real estate contacts, 
home sales were mixed and prices continued to modestly appreciate compared with a year ago. Builders reported that 
new home construction increased since the previous report. Commercial real estate contacts indicated that demand 
continued to improve. Manufacturing purchasing managers cited increases in new orders and production.    
Employment and Wages  
Business contacts continued to report a tightening labor 
market across some geographies, industries, and skill 
sets. Finding and retaining hospitality workers, long-haul 
drivers, technicians, skilled craft laborers, distribution 
workers, nurses and other medical staff, and information 
technology professionals was especially difficult. Con-
tacts also noted that geographic mobility was a major 
challenge, as workers’ willingness to relocate for a posi-
tion remained more challenging than in the past. Overall, 
contacts expressed that recruiting and retention efforts 
were much more aggressive and creative than they were 
a year ago. Firms also continued to boost training efforts 
and programs for existing employees and less experi-
enced employees, to expand partnerships with workforce 
development entities and community colleges, and to 
broaden their geographical search for candidates.  
On average, annual wage increases remained in the two 
to four percent range. The intensity of wage pressure 
varied greatly across the region. Firms reporting mild 
pressure typically responded by offering nondirect wage 
benefits, like increased vacation time, flexible schedul-
ing, and marketing a positive culture to both existing and 
potential workers. In cases where wage pressures were 
described as “acute,” if firms were still not able to meet 
demand with their existing labor supply after implement-
ing nonwage benefits, they typically raised wages, often 
considerably.      
Prices  
Overall, contacts reported that input costs were mostly 
flat with some reporting limited pricing power. However, 
most manufacturing contacts reported increases in input 
costs, particularly for steel, aluminum, and transporta-
tion. Some companies reported the ability to pass along 
these commodity input cost increases due to expecta-
tions of rising costs related to tariffs. The Atlanta Fed’s 
Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-
over-year unit costs were up 1.9 percent in May. Looking 
ahead, survey respondents indicated that they expect 
unit costs to rise 2.0 percent over the next twelve 
months.         
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
On balance, District retail contacts reported a slight pick-
up in sales levels since the last report. Retailers expect 
modest increases in spending over the summer months. 
Sales of light trucks continue to remain strong according 
to auto dealers.  
Tourism and hospitality contacts across the District 
reported growth in the number of visitors and activity in 
April compared to a year ago. Expectations among most 
contacts are for a strong summer season in leisure and 
business travel.      
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from District residential real estate contacts 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
signaled modest but continued growth. Builders reported 
construction activity in May was slightly up compared to 
one year earlier. Builders indicated that home sales and 
traffic were flat to up slightly from the year-ago level; 
while broker reports were mixed. Most builders said 
inventory levels remained unchanged from one year ago; 
while brokers noted that inventory levels were down. The 
majority of builders and brokers continued to report 
home price increases in May. Southeast builders expect 
home sales to meet or exceed the year-ago level over 
the next three months; while brokers expect home sales 
activity to increase slightly over the same period. Many 
builders expect the pace of construction activity over the 
next three months to hold steady or increase slightly.  
Many District commercial real estate contacts noted 
improvements in demand that continued to result in rent 
growth and increased absorption, but cautioned that the 
rate of improvement varies by metropolitan area, sub-
market, and property type. The majority of commercial 
contractors indicated that the pace of nonresidential and 
multifamily construction activity matched the year-ago 
level. Most contacts reported a healthy pipeline of activi-
ty, with backlogs greater than or equal to the previous 
year. Commercial construction contacts’ outlook for 
nonresidential and multifamily construction across the 
District remained positive, with the majority anticipating 
activity to match or exceed the current level.       
Manufacturing 
District manufacturers indicated that overall business 
activity remained strong over the reporting period. Con-
tacts reported that sales levels and demand for new 
orders were solid, and production levels continued to 
increase. While there were scattered reports of firms 
decreasing or holding employment levels steady, most 
firms suggested they were adding to their payrolls. Ex-
pectations for future production levels decreased from 
the previous period, as a little less than half of contacts 
expected higher production over the next six months.        
Transportation 
Most District transportation firms cited increased activity 
from April through mid-May. At District ports, container 
volumes, along with roll-on/roll-off auto and machinery 
cargo, bulk and breakbulk cargoes, continued to grow. 
Railroads reported modest gains in intermodal traffic 
from year earlier levels. However, overall year-to-date 
rail volumes were down slightly, driven by declines in the 
movement of nonmetallic minerals (including phos-
phates), iron and steel scrap, waste and nonferrous 
scrap, and metallic ores. Freight forwarders and logistics 
firms noted strong demand for delivery services. Con-
tacts cited concerns that steel and aluminum tariffs will 
raise overall costs and slow activity. However, while 
uncertainty over trade policy had not negatively impacted 
capital projects already underway, a number indicated 
that they have tapped the brakes on projects in the plan-
ning phases. Even so, the majority of contacts expect 
activity over the next 12 months to increase.         
Banking and Finance  
District financial institutions continued to report solid loan 
growth. However, as interest rates increased, bankers 
expressed concerns about the impact on deposits and 
liquidity. Community bank contacts reported that they 
were experiencing deposit pressure as competitors 
begin to raise rates. Overall, growth in borrowing ex-
ceeded growth in deposits; however, the majority of loan 
growth was still being funded by nonmaturity deposits.          
Energy  
Energy sector contacts described overall industry activity 
as steady to up from the prior report. Onshore shale 
drilling activity continued to accelerate, though offshore 
exploration and production remained depressed. Con-
tacts expect a record year of natural gas supply growth 
in 2018, which, along with growing crude supply, gener-
ated pipeline construction projects in order to increase 
capacity. Chemical refining companies experienced 
continued, steady demand. Exports of refined chemical 
products and crude oil continued to surge as many refin-
eries increased capacity. Rising crude exports also 
reduced demand for storage needs, leading some firms 
to pull back from creating or constructing storage capaci-
ty. Contacts from the utilities sector noted that while 
industrial segment growth was up, behavioral trends 
among residential and commercial customers to reduce 
energy usage lowered electricity sales.       
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Drought conditions abated in parts of Alabama and 
Georgia but deteriorated slightly in south Florida. May’s 
forecast for Florida's orange crops was down from April. 
On a year-over-year basis, prices paid to farmers in 
March were up for corn, rice, soybeans, broilers, and 
eggs, flat for beef, and down for cotton. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District remained at a moderate pace in April and early May, and contacts 
expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Manufacturing production increased strongly, 
employment grew moderately, consumer and business spending rose modestly, and construction and real estate activi-
ty increased slightly. Wages and prices increased modestly and financial conditions improved modestly. The outlook for 
farm income brightened, due largely to improvements in the crop sector. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth remained at a moderate pace over 
the reporting period, and contacts expected gains to 
continue at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Hiring 
was focused on production and on professional and 
technical workers. As they have for some time, contacts 
indicated that the labor market was tight and reported 
difficulties filling positions at all skill levels. There contin-
ued to be reports from manufacturing and construction 
firms that they had delayed or turned down projects 
because of difficulties in finding workers. There were 
also reports of firms choosing not to lay off workers 
during production lulls so that they would not have to find 
new workers when activity picked up again. Wage 
growth remained modest overall, though a number of 
contacts noted that wage pressures had intensified in 
recent months, and there were more reports of pay 
increases for production workers. Most firms reported 
rising benefits costs. 
Prices 
In general, prices rose modestly in April and early May, 
and contacts expected prices to continue to increase at 
that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail prices were 
flat overall, though there were reports of price increases 
in the home improvement and the lawn and garden 
segments. One contact indicated that retail pricing was 
“highly competitive.” Producer prices rose modestly, 
reflecting in part the pass-through of higher labor, materi-
als, and freight costs. Numerous contacts noted that 
freight costs had increased dramatically. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Nonauto retail sales rose slightly, with gains 
reported in the furniture, appliances, home improvement, 
and personal services segments. One contact noted an 
increase in purchases using credit, particularly for dura-
ble goods. Contacts were generally optimistic about the 
coming summer sales season. Light vehicle sales rose 
slightly. The sales mix of new light vehicles continued to 
shift toward light trucks, particularly toward crossover 
utility vehicles. Used vehicle sales increased modestly. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in April and early 
May. Retail contacts indicated that inventories were 
generally at comfortable levels. Most manufacturing 
contacts did so as well, though some noted that strong 
demand had led to shortages of some of their products 
and others said that lead times from parts and materials 
suppliers had increased. Capital spending increased 
modestly, and contacts expected growth to continue at 
that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were 
primarily for replacing industrial and IT equipment and 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

G-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
for renovating structures. Dealers reported that sales of 
medium-duty trucks remained robust. Contacts again 
indicated that lead times for purchasing new equipment 
had increased. Demand for energy by commercial and 
industrial users increased modestly. Demand for trans-
portation services increased moderately from an already 
high level. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased slightly, led by growth in suburban single-family 
homebuilding. Multiple contacts noted strong demand for 
single-family starter homes but stated that low invento-
ries continued to hold back sales. Prices were up notably 
in this market segment. In contrast, demand and prices 
for higher-end homes changed little. Contacts also indi-
cated that rising labor and materials costs were making it 
difficult for homebuilders to turn a profit. Nonresidential 
construction was little changed overall, though contacts 
again said they expected building to pick up in the com-
ing months because vacancy rates were low, particularly 
in the industrial segment. Commercial real estate activity 
was flat but at a strong level. Commercial rents, vacancy 
rates, and the availability of sublease space were all 
unchanged. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production continued at a 
strong rate in April and early May. Steel production in-
creased moderately, in response to steady end-user 
demand. Imports slowed after the steel and aluminum 
tariffs were enacted, and contacts noted ongoing uncer-
tainty about whether there would be further changes in 
tariffs policy. Demand for heavy machinery increased 
strongly, reflecting both end-user demand and dealers 
rebuilding inventories. Demand for heavy trucks re-
mained at a high level and one contact noted that heavy 
truck producers were running at close to full capacity. 
Order books for specialty metals manufacturers in-
creased modestly. Manufacturers of construction materi-
als continued to report slow but steady increases in 
shipments, in line with the pace of improvement in con-
struction. Auto production increased modestly and re-
mained at a solid level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly over the report-
ing period. Financial market participants reported little 
change in equities prices or volatility but some increase 
in interest rates. Business loan demand increased slight-
ly, led by growth in small business lending. Loans were 
primarily for financing real estate and capital equipment. 
While competition remained strong, contacts reported 
little change in lending standards or loan quality. Con-
sumer loan demand increased modestly, driven by in-
creases in residential mortgage activity. Consumer loan 
quality and lending standards were little changed. 
Agriculture 
The outlook for farm income for 2018 brightened again, 
with improvements concentrated in the crop sector.  
Nonetheless, several contacts expressed unease over 
the potential impact of international trade policies on the 
farming sector. After weather-related delays, corn and 
soybean planting proceeded quickly in Illinois and Indi-
ana, to the point that it was running ahead of normal 
progress. However, Iowa and Wisconsin were somewhat 
behind their typical paces for planting. Corn prices rose 
during the reporting period, while soybean prices drifted 
down. Dry weather and the late spring hindered the 
development of pastures, which led to shortages of and 
higher prices for hay, cutting into margins for some live-
stock producers. Cattle and egg prices were down, but 
hog and dairy prices moved up. Dairy prices were still 
quite low, however, and there were reports of a bump up 
in operators exiting the sector. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions in the District have improved slightly since our previous report. Firms reported slight increases in 
employment despite continued difficulties finding workers. Wages and nonlabor costs increased at a moderate pace. 
Prices and price pressures grew modestly. Reports from consumer spending contacts were mixed. Manufacturers re-
ported declines in production, capacity utilization, and new orders. Contacts in nonfinancial services indicated modest 
growth across their sectors. Residential real estate contacts reported sluggish sales resulting from low inventories and 
slightly lower demand, while construction activity increased modestly. District bankers reported slightly weaker demand 
and a decline in the creditworthiness of loan applicants. Agriculture conditions improved modestly. Overall, the outlook 
among contacts weakened somewhat but remains optimistic. On net, 27 percent of contacts expect conditions in 2018 
to be better or somewhat better than in 2017.   
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased slightly since the previous 
report. Of the contacts surveyed, on net, 13 percent 
reported that second-quarter employment was higher or 
slightly higher than a year ago. Several firms across a 
variety of industries announced plans to expand and hire 
new employees, including manufacturers of chemical 
products, wood products, and primary metals. Contacts 
in Missouri and Arkansas also reported difficulties filling 
skilled technical and engineering positions. Some local 
employers have begun relaxing drug-testing standards 
and reducing restrictions on hiring convicted felons in 
order to alleviate labor shortages. 
Contacts reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report. On net, 51 percent of contacts reported 
wages were higher or slightly higher than a year ago, 
and 43 percent reported increases in labor costs. Sever-
al contacts noted that the tight labor market has exerted 
upward pressure on wages for both entry-level and 
skilled positions.    
Prices  
Overall, prices charged to consumers increased at a 
modest pace. On net, 31 percent of contacts reported 
that prices were higher than a year ago. This is higher 
than three months ago, indicating an increase in growth 
from earlier this year.  
Nonlabor input costs rose modestly, though at a slower 
pace than the previous survey three months ago. On net, 
29 percent of contacts reported that costs were higher 
than a year ago. Multiple contacts noted that construc-
tion costs increased. In particular, a contact in Little Rock 
reported a strong increase in lumber prices, and several 
contacts in Louisville reported that the proposed steel 
and aluminum tariffs caused metals prices to rise. Auto-
motive and corrugated products manufacturers also 
reported increases in raw materials prices. 
Commodity price movements were mixed. Sorghum and 
soybean prices decreased modestly; coal, corn meal, 
cottonseed, rice, and soybean meal were flat; and corn, 
corn feed, cotton, and wheat prices increased modestly.   
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate mixed consumer spending activity. Real 
sales tax collections increased in Arkansas and Tennes-
see relative to a year ago, remained flat in Missouri, and 
declined in Kentucky. Reports on sales from general 
retailers were mixed. On net, 40 percent of auto dealers 
indicated that sales were below expectations in the 
second quarter. About the same net percentage noted a 
shift in demand toward used vehicles. Hospitality and 
tourism contacts in Missouri reported business activity 
that met or exceeded expectations and have a positive 
outlook for the next few months.   
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Overall manufacturing activity has declined slightly since 
our previous report. Most contacts reported that produc-
tion, capacity utilization, and new orders were down in 
the second quarter relative to one year ago, with greater 
shares reporting declines in production and new orders 
than in our previous survey. The percentage of contacts 
reporting increases in new orders has fallen for over a 
year. However, contacts were more optimistic about the 
next quarter.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector has expanded modestly 
since the previous report. Transportation and service 
contacts generally reported that sales met expectations 
in the current quarter. On net, 23 percent of contacts 
reported higher dollar sales in the current quarter than 
this time last year, and 43 percent expect sales to be 
higher in the next quarter relative to the same time a 
year ago.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has declined slightly since 
the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home sales 
dipped slightly in March across the four major MSAs in 
the District. On net, a third of contacts reported that 
sales halfway through the second quarter have fallen 
short of expectations. Contacts attributed this shortfall to 
a decline in inventory and a slight drop in demand rela-
tive to the same time last year. However, demand is 
expected to return to year-ago levels in the third quarter.    
Residential construction activity has increased modestly 
since the previous report. There was a moderate uptick 
in March permit activity across most of the District’s 
MSAs. On net, only 10 percent of contacts reported that 
residential construction increased in the second quarter 
compared with a year earlier, but around twice that num-
ber expect activity to increase in the coming quarter. 
Commercial real estate activity improved slightly. Local 
contacts, on net, reported increased demand for industri-
al and office properties relative to a year ago. They also 
state that inventories for both property types have de-
clined. These trends are expected to continue into the 
third quarter. 
Commercial construction activity improved modestly. On 
net, contacts reported higher demand for construction of 
all property types and noted that inventories for industrial 
and retail property types have improved. The majority of 
contacts continued to have an optimistic outlook for the 
remainder of 2018.    
 
Banking and Finance 
Banking market conditions in the District have weakened 
slightly since the previous report. Banking contacts re-
ported that demand for mortgage and auto loans fell 
modestly in year-over-year terms while demand for 
business loans was flat. Bankers also reported that the 
creditworthiness of loan applicants declined relative to 
last year, particularly among applicants for auto loans 
and credit cards. Delinquencies fell across all loan cate-
gories but to varying degrees; mortgage and auto loan 
delinquencies dropped slightly, while delinquencies on 
business loans and credit cards decreased at a moder-
ate rate.   
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions improved modestly from 
the previous reporting period and robustly from the same 
time last year. After contacts reported concerns about 
weather being too wet and cold for a strong early plant-
ing season, mid-May planned acreage planted for corn, 
cotton, and soybeans were, respectively, 13, 12, and 24 
percentage points above the same time last year. Rice 
planting progress was slightly behind 2017. Contacts 
indicated that the prospective Chinese tariffs on U.S. 
soybeans would be damaging to exporters but at this 
point seemed unlikely. 
Natural resource extraction conditions were roughly 
unchanged from the previous report and year. Seasonal-
ly adjusted coal production fell 1 percent from March to 
April, and April production was also down 4 percent from 
the same month last year. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew moderately since the last report. Employment grew modestly and continued to be 
restrained by a tight labor supply. Wage growth was moderate, while price pressures increased slightly. Growth was 
noted in consumer spending, services, commercial construction, commercial real estate, manufacturing, energy, and 
mining. Agriculture and residential real estate conditions were mixed, while residential construction was broadly lower 
across the District.   
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew modestly since the last report and 
continued to be restrained by a tight labor supply. Hiring 
demand appeared robust. A job fair in northwestern 
Wisconsin had a full roster of interested employers and 
had to turn away others. A job fair in eastern Minnesota 
was also sold out with 50 employers, who reported 
almost 1,700 open positions. North Dakota saw April 
online job postings rise 9 percent over a year ago. 
Minnesota construction firms reported strong hiring, 
especially among skilled workers. A poll of human 
resource professionals in Montana found near-universal 
hiring, along with more unfilled jobs compared with last 
year. A poll of Minnesota staffing firms found that a 
majority saw job orders increase in the first quarter of 
2018 compared with the same period a year earlier, and 
similar results were expected in the second quarter. 
However, hours booked did not grow at a similar rate, 
reflecting an inability to find workers for available jobs. 
There were some signs of softness. Through the end of 
April, initial unemployment insurance claims were higher 
in Minnesota and Wisconsin, temporarily halting a 
lengthy downward trend; continuing claims were also 
higher in Minnesota and South Dakota. The bankruptcy 
of a major retailer has affected or will affect an estimated 
2,000 or more workers across the District.   
Wage pressures were moderate but with some signs of 
stronger growth. A majority of Minnesota staffing firms 
said wages paid by clients in the first quarter of 2018 
were more than 3 percent higher than a year earlier. 
However, a notable majority of staffing respondents 
expected wages at their own firms to grow less than 3 
percent. A poll of Montana human resource 
professionals found that close to half expected average 
wages this year to increase by more than 3 percent. 
However, a poll among Minnesota construction firms 
showed that 2018 wage expectations were more modest 
despite persistent reports of labor shortages.     
Prices  
Price pressures increased slightly relative to the previous 
report, while certain input prices were growing more 
rapidly. An April survey of purchasing managers 
indicated increased inflation expectations relative to the 
previous month. Contacts from manufacturing, energy, 
and construction reported that prices of steel products 
continued to increase sharply in response to recently 
announced tariffs. Retail fuel prices in most District 
states as of mid-May increased briskly from the previous 
reporting period. Prices received by farmers for corn, 
soybeans, wheat, hay, chickens, and eggs increased in 
March compared with a year earlier; cattle prices were 
flat, while prices for milk, hogs, and turkeys decreased.    
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer spending rose modestly since the last report. 
Several Montana bankers noted an increase in 
consumer retail loans, especially home equity loans, 
which were being used for home improvements and 
general spending. An operator of several car dealerships 
reported that new car sales were up every month this 
year relative to last, while used car sales were flat. While 
gaming revenue this spring in Deadwood, S.D., declined 
by 5 percent compared with a year earlier, total hotel 
stays and occupancy rates in the region rose compared 
with last year; Minnesota lodging demand also increased 
by 1 percent over a year earlier. Thanks to heavy 
snowfall, Montana resorts reported strong ski seasons; 
one resort bested its previous record for visitors by 10 
percent. However, a cold and wet spring—including 
record April snowfall in some parts of the District—
delayed or otherwise dampened fishing-related visits and 
spending in northern areas, where lakes remained 
frozen as long as a month later than normal.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. Accountants reported a 
strong tax season, partly due to recent changes in 
federal tax policy. Contacts reported major disruptions in 
international supply-chain management and import-
export banking business due to uncertainty over trade 
policy. While the health care sector has seen strong 
growth overall, rural healthcare providers were 
experiencing weaker demand, as the slowdown in 
agriculture lingered.    
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction saw moderate growth overall 
since the last report, though activity levels differed 
regionally. An industry database of project activity across 
multiple states showed that current levels were similar to 
last year’s solid activity. A Minnesota concrete contact 
reported that commercial construction “continues to be 
busy.” However, the aforementioned poll of Minnesota 
construction firms found less optimism, with a majority 
reporting flat or lower activity compared with a year ago, 
likely the result of a cold and wet April. Certain markets, 
including Sioux Falls, S.D., and Mankato and St. Cloud, 
Minn., have seen strong permitting activity this spring. 
Medical construction continued to show strength, with 
major hospital expansions announced in Minnesota and 
Montana.  Residential construction was broadly lower 
across most of the District. Following a strong March, 
residential permits in Minneapolis-St. Paul fell 
significantly in April. Single-family permits in April were 
also lower in Rochester, Minn., Fargo, N.D., and Billings, 
Mont.  
Commercial real estate grew modestly since the last 
report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, industrial activity saw 
continued growth, with solid levels of new construction 
and low vacancy rates. Office sales in the region have 
been brisk, and vacancy rates in this sector have been 
stable. Apartment sales have slowed year-to-date in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul compared with last year, though 
2017 was a very strong year. The recent bankruptcy of a 
national retailer will see the closure of almost 40 stores 
and well over 1 million square feet of space in the 
district; this comes on top of numerous earlier chain-
store closures this year. While retail vacancy rates in 
some cities have remained stable, others have risen, 
including in Eau Claire, Wis. Residential real estate was 
mixed. April sales in Minnesota were down 3 percent 
from a year earlier, with Minneapolis-St. Paul seeing a 
drop of almost 6 percent. However, Missoula and 
Bozeman, Mont., saw notably higher sales, and Sioux 
Falls home sales also rose slightly.   
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased robustly. An 
index of manufacturing conditions indicated strongly 
increased activity in April compared with a month earlier 
in Minnesota and South Dakota; the index for North 
Dakota indicated flat to slightly decreased activity. 
Multiple contacts from a diverse group of industries 
described strong orders so far this year, with some 
experiencing record growth; strong demand was leading 
to challenges filling orders and to increased lead times. 
Contacts were also concerned about supply-chain 
disruptions in the steel and aluminum materials markets 
in response to recent tariff announcements.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were mixed. While recent 
increases in some commodity prices were viewed as a 
positive sign, farmers were also concerned about access 
to international markets. Late-season snows delayed 
spring planting in much of the District, with crop progress 
well behind five-year averages as of mid-May. Activity in 
the energy sector continued to increase. District oil and 
gas exploration increased from the previous report. 
March natural gas production in North Dakota hit a new 
record, while oil production declined slightly. District iron 
ore mines were operating near capacity, and an idled 
facility was reportedly considering restarting production.   
■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Overall Tenth District economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in April and early May, with many contacts ex-
pecting further growth in the months ahead. District manufacturing contacts reported a more rapid pace of expansion 
compared to the previous survey. Consumer spending, energy, and business services activity increased at a moderate 
pace, while District real estate firms reported a modest pace of growth. Bankers reported a modest increase in overall 
loan demand and deposit levels, and a moderate improvement in loan quality. Agricultural conditions weakened, but at a 
slower pace, as most commodity prices have risen slightly. Employment and employee hours continued to rise modest-
ly, and contacts reported modest wage growth with moderate increases expected in coming months. Input prices were 
up moderately compared to the previous survey period, while selling prices rose modestly.  
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours continued to 
rise modestly in April and early May, and expectations 
were for a slightly faster pace of growth in the months 
ahead. Contacts in the auto sales, education, restaurant, 
and health services sectors noted a decline in both 
employment and employee hours, while all other sectors 
reported growth. All sectors expected an increase in 
employment in the months ahead with the exception of 
auto sales. Respondents noted a shortage of commer-
cial drivers, salespeople, and service workers.    
Contacts in most sectors reported modest wage growth 
and anticipated moderate wage gains moving forward. 
Prices  
In most sectors, input prices were up moderately com-
pared to the prior survey period, while selling prices grew 
modestly. In the retail sector, input prices rose moderate-
ly and selling prices increased at a modest pace. Res-
taurant contacts reported flat growth in input prices, 
while selling prices edged up. Respondents in the trans-
portation sector noted moderate growth in both input and 
selling prices, and expected continued moderate rises in 
both. Prices in the construction sector continued to ex-
pand moderately, with moderate increases expected in 
the coming months. Manufacturers reported a modest 
rise in prices for finished goods, while raw material costs 
continued to increase moderately. Manufacturers antici-
pated moderate price gains for both finished goods and 
raw materials in the next few months.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity grew moderately in April and 
early May, and firms expected strong growth in coming 
months. Retail sales increased moderately compared to 
the previous survey period, and remained well above 
year-ago levels. Several retailers noted an increase in 
sales for outdoor and lower-priced items, while higher-
priced products sold poorly. Retail contacts anticipated 
sales to rise considerably in the next few months, and 
inventory levels were expected to increase moderately. 
Auto sales rose rapidly after many months of decline and 
were above year-ago levels. Dealer contacts anticipated 
a moderate pickup in sales for the months ahead, and 
inventory levels were expected to increase modestly. 
Restaurant sales rose modestly and were above year-
ago levels. Restaurant contacts expected activity to 
continue to increase moderately heading forward. District 
tourism activity rebounded strongly after a slight decline 
during the last survey period, and contacts expected 
activity to increase modestly heading into the summer 
months.  
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded more rapidly than in the 
previous survey period, and the majority of other busi-
ness contacts reported moderate sales increases. Facto-
ry activity accelerated at both durable and nondurable 
goods plants, particularly for machinery, plastics, and 
chemicals. Despite rising trade concerns, production, 
shipments, and new orders grew moderately, and activity 
was higher than a year ago. Manufacturers’ capital 
spending plans remained solid, and optimism remained 
high for future activity.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
transportation firms reported moderate sales growth, and 
wholesale trade contacts reported a strong increase in 
activity. All firms expected sales to rise rapidly in the next 
six months. Professional, high tech, and transportation 
contacts anticipated moderate growth in capital spending 
plans, and wholesale trade contacts expected strong 
capital spending growth in coming months. 
Real Estate and Construction  
Overall District real estate activity increased modestly as 
residential real estate sales were stable, residential 
construction activity picked up moderately, and the com-
mercial real estate sector expanded modestly. Residen-
tial home sales and inventories were flat compared to 
the previous survey period, while home prices rose 
modestly. Sales and inventories of residential homes 
were expected to remain flat, while home prices were 
projected to increase. Residential construction activity 
increased moderately compared to the previous survey 
period and the same time last year, including higher 
housing starts, traffic of potential buyers, and construc-
tion supply sales. Contacts anticipated additional gains 
in residential construction activity in the months ahead. 
Commercial real estate activity continued to increase 
modestly as absorption, completions, construction un-
derway, and sales increased, while vacancy rates de-
clined. Activity in the commercial real estate sector was 
expected to expand further moving forward. 
Banking 
Bankers reported a modest increase in overall loan 
demand for the month of April. Respondents reported 
modest increases for commercial real estate, commer-
cial and industrial, and residential real estate loans. 
Consumer installment loans were down slightly, while 
agricultural loans were steady. Bankers indicated loan 
quality improved moderately compared to a year ago. In 
addition, respondents expected a modest increase in 
loan quality over the next six months. Credit standards 
remained largely unchanged in all major loan categories. 
Overall, bankers reported a modest increase in deposit 
levels.  
Energy 
District energy activity increased moderately since the 
last survey period with steady expectations for the future.  
The number of oil rigs continued to increase modestly, 
while the number of active gas rigs was mostly un-
changed.  Oil and gas production has increased and was 
expected to continue increasing.  Activity has picked up 
in the Niobrara and Oklahoma shale plays.  Oil prices 
reached their highest level since 2014, which has en-
couraged additional production.  In Wyoming, applica-
tions for drilling permits are at record levels as producers 
seek opportunities to operate in the Powder River Basin.  
Increased oil and gas production has put pressure on 
energy transportation infrastructure, and new oil and gas 
pipeline projects have been announced for Oklahoma’s 
Anadarko region that should alleviate some of the pres-
sure later in the year. 
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy continued to weaken 
but the pace of deterioration slowed due to a slight uptick 
in agricultural commodity prices. Prices for all major 
agricultural commodities in the District increased slightly 
during the survey period. Despite the increase in prices, 
farm income continued to decline and demand for financ-
ing remained high. Bankers generally expect the pace of 
loan demand to increase in coming months and contin-
ued to report increased interest rates on all types of 
agricultural loans, which could raise interest expenses 
for farm borrowers. However, farmland values remained 
relatively stable and loan delinquency rates remained 
low. District contacts expressed concern about liquidity 
in the farm sector due to further income declines, but the 
relative stability of farmland values provided ongoing 
support for both producers and lenders.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded at a solid pace over the past six weeks. Growth in manufacturing increased. 
Expansion in the energy and service sectors continued at about the same pace, while retail spending was mixed. Home 
sales continued to rise but apartment markets softened slightly. Hiring was solid across most sectors, and widespread 
labor shortages continued. Wage and price pressures remained elevated, and several contacts noted a sharp rise in the 
cost of steel and aluminum. Outlooks remained fairly optimistic, but tariffs and trade-related concerns were creating 
uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment growth was solid and widespread across 
sectors. Labor market tightness continued across a wide 
range of industries and skill levels, with some contacts 
saying difficulty finding workers was constraining growth 
to some extent. One staffing services contact noted that 
some firms were rehiring former retired employees on a 
part-time basis to meet their staffing needs. In Houston, 
shortages of painters, tile setters, carpet layers (workers 
at the backend of the home construction cycle) were 
noted, a departure from earlier in the year when mostly 
sheet rock/drywall installers were in short supply. Up-
stream energy firms said all skill levels were in short 
supply, but shortages were most acute for skilled work-
ers.  
Wage pressure remained elevated and picked up partic-
ularly among manufacturing firms. A large share of re-
spondents noted increasing wages to recruit and retain 
employees. One contact reported offering large bonuses 
for trades, such as machinists and welders, who were 
willing to commit to stay for three years. A health care 
firm cited high vacancy rates for registered nurse posi-
tions.  
Prices 
Price pressures remained elevated. Raw material prices 
and other input costs continued to climb, but several 
firms noted they had limited ability to pass on higher 
costs to customers. Input cost pressures increased 
among energy, manufacturing, and construction firms, in 
part due to the new tariffs on lumber, steel and alumi-
num. Upstream energy firms expressed concern about 
the new tariffs adversely affecting their operations and 
costs in the near term. One energy contact reported a 
sharp rise in rates of drilling rigs. Some auto dealers 
cited a higher-than-average increase in used-vehicle 
prices, and transportation service firms noted rising fuel 
costs. Gasoline and diesel prices rose, driven largely by 
higher crude oil prices, while the average price for natu-
ral gas dipped during the reporting period. 
Manufacturing  
Growth in the manufacturing sector strengthened after 
having slowed in the prior reporting period. Output 
growth rose, led by increases in primary metals, trans-
portation equipment, machinery, and high tech manufac-
turing. Growth in food and nonmetallic mineral (stone, 
clay, cement and glass) production picked up. Demand 
for fabricated metals manufacturing increased, with one 
contact noting strength in oil and gas related activity. 
Chemical production expanded during the reporting 
period, and refinery utilization rates were up in April but 
dipped slightly in early May. Outlooks remained optimis-
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
tic, although several contacts noted that the new tariffs 
were creating uncertainty in expectations. Refiners and 
petrochemical producers expressed negative views 
about the potential impact of tariffs and quotas on ex-
ports as well as new construction projects.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales, including companywide internet sales, 
dipped in April but appear to have picked up in early 
May. Seasonal retailers attributed the decline in April 
sales to colder-than-normal weather. Reports on auto 
sales were mixed, with sales weakening slightly in San 
Antonio but increasing in Dallas and Houston. Sales 
growth among durable wholesalers was solid. Outlooks 
among retailers were positive on net. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Broad-based expansion continued in the nonfinancial 
services sector. Transportation services was a particular 
bright spot. Rail traffic was near record levels, with the 
increase in shipments being broad based across busi-
ness lines. Courier and sea cargo volumes expanded as 
well, with growth in the latter being boosted by marked 
increases in steel shipments as shippers rushed to bring 
them in before the new tariffs were implemented. Re-
ports on airline passenger demand were mixed, but 
outlooks remained optimistic. Leisure and hospitality 
contacts said spring break activity was mixed, but Easter 
traffic was strong along the coastal area near Houston. 
Revenue at professional and technical service firms 
rose, and staffing services firms continued to note high 
levels of demand, driven by widespread increases in 
activity across geographies and sectors. Outlooks im-
proved, although uncertainty surrounding trade policies 
and rising interest rates negatively impacted some firms' 
expectations.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose during the reporting period, with contin-
ued strength in sales at the low- to mid-price points. Year
-to-date sales were generally on or ahead of plan for 
builders. Buyers remained price sensitive, and builders 
have been focused on housing affordability. One contact 
noted that in Houston, some builders were downsizing 
homes on large lots to bring the price point down. Con-
tacts said several new deals are not being penciled in 
partly due to high and/or rising land, development, and 
other costs. Outlooks were positive, although margin 
compression, climbing material costs, and rising interest 
rates were a concern. 
Ample supply coupled with modest demand has slowed 
apartment rent growth in most major metros. In Houston, 
however, net absorption has been solid and overall rent 
growth has been strong as well. Some contacts noted a 
pickup in investment activity.  
Office leasing activity and/or net absorption slowed in 
Dallas-Fort Worth and remained sluggish in Houston. 
Conditions in industrial markets were characterized as 
solid, while reports on retail space activity were mixed.  
Financial Services 
Loan volumes and demand expanded at a faster pace 
compared with the previous reporting period. Strong 
growth was seen in commercial and industrial, and com-
mercial and residential real estate lending. Consumer 
loan volumes increased modestly. Credit standards 
remained flat or ticked down, while loan pricing contin-
ued to increase. The volume of deposits increased at a 
slower pace than in the last report, and a few contacts 
noted increased competition for deposits. Banking con-
tacts remained optimistic as they expect both loan de-
mand and general business activity to improve. 
Energy 
Energy activity continued to expand moderately. Drilling 
and completion activity increased in the Eleventh District, 
particularly in the Permian Basin. Large firms are driving 
growth, and it remained difficult for small exploration and 
production companies to expand operations despite high 
oil prices. Outlooks remained positive, supported by 
favorable oil prices, although contacts said pipeline 
capacity, labor, and supply chain constraints may limit 
further increases in production growth. 
Agriculture 
Drought conditions continued to plague much of West 
Texas and Southern New Mexico, particularly in the 
Texas panhandle. Crop conditions for winter wheat were 
much poorer compared with last year due to the lack of 
soil moisture. Row crop planting continued and crops 
were in mostly fair to good condition, but there was 
concern among producers about the dry weather poten-
tially causing below-average yields. Given the current 
level of prices, grain farmers need at least average 
yields to be profitable this year. Cotton farmers were a 
bit more optimistic due to higher prices over the last six 
weeks and because cotton yields generally hold up 
better than other crops during drought. Cattle prices 
rose, largely due to seasonal factors but also buoyed by 
very strong domestic and international demand. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of early 
April through mid-May. Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and wage pressures ticked up. Price inflation 
increased moderately. Sales of retail goods edged up, while activity in consumer and business services expanded 
slightly. Activity in the manufacturing sector expanded solidly, and conditions in the agriculture sector deteriorated 
somewhat. Contacts reported that residential real estate market activity remained solid, and activity in the commercial 
real estate sector picked up notably. Lending activity ticked up modestly. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts continued to report tight labor market condi-
tions across all sectors, leading to an uptick in wage 
pressures and to labor-retention challenges. Demand for 
workers in the restaurant industry increased markedly. 
Demand for construction labor continued to exceed 
supply, causing wages to rise moderately and wait times 
for project starts to increase. Across the District, contacts 
in banking and financial services noted persistent short-
ages of IT professionals, especially at companies or 
branches in rural areas. In response to shortages of 
skilled labor in banking services and manufacturing, 
contacts noted the growth of strategic training partner-
ships between these employers and colleges and trade 
schools to build a talent pipeline. A contact in the Pacific 
Northwest reported intensified labor shortages in the 
health-care sector, preventing service providers from 
meeting market demand. Employers in the business 
services and real estate development sectors increased 
compensation packages to compete with companies 
trying to poach well-trained employees. Employment in 
the utilities sector was broadly flat.  
Prices  
Price inflation increased moderately over the reporting 
period. Recent oil price increases spurred price inflation 
in a variety of sectors. Food and beverage businesses 
passed along a jump in transportation costs to consum-
ers. Persistently brisk activity in the construction sector 
continued to exert upward pressure on prices for building 
materials. Contacts observed modest price inflation for 
manufactured medical devices after input costs in-
creased somewhat. Contacts in Oregon and the Moun-
tain West observed rising retail gasoline prices. A con-
tact in Southern California reported that increases in 
commercial rents for restaurants drove some inflation for 
customer prices. Semiconductor prices increased mod-
estly. A contact in the California agriculture industry 
noted a slight pickup in inflation due to a weak outlook 
for yields after subpar rainfall levels. In Eastern Wash-
ington, the price of imported wholesale natural gas de-
clined moderately, lowering heating costs in the area.    
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods edged up over the reporting period. 
Contacts reported solid sales at food and beverage 
companies. Sales activity in the pharmaceutical industry 
picked up due to intensifying competition that drove 
down market prices. Apparel sales increased marginally 
following recent declines, though consumer demand 
continued to shift to entertainment goods and services. 
The restaurant industry saw sales tick down further, as 
foot traffic remained at low levels.    
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
expanded slightly. Across the District, consolidation in 
health provider and payment services continued at a 
solid pace. Health insurance enrollment in the Mountain 
West grew modestly, causing revenues and earnings to 
The Beige Book ■ May 2018 

L-2
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
edge up. Demand for legal services in Hawaii picked up 
slightly. 
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector expanded solidly. 
Demand for steel and other manufactured inputs used in 
the production of heavy capital goods picked up noticea-
bly, reflecting stronger industrial and consumer activity. 
Contacts in Northern California noted brisk semiconduc-
tor sales and the scope for demand to increase further. 
Deliveries of commercial aircraft over the first four 
months of the year increased modestly from the same 
period last year, while new orders grew significantly over 
the same period.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector deteriorated some-
what. Current inventories and yield expectations for a 
variety of crops fell because of lower-than-expected 
precipitation levels in much of the District over the past 
few months. Unusually warm weather in the Pacific 
Northwest generated softer demand for heating, putting 
downward pressure on natural gas prices in the region. 
The supply of electricity continued to outpace demand in 
California, leading excess capacity to rise in the state.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets continued to expand at a 
robust pace. Construction in the residential market re-
mained solid, though the shortage of labor and intense 
price pressures for building materials continued to act as 
headwinds. Contacts in Eastern Washington reported 
that permitting for residential units was flat on a year-
over-year basis, though at an elevated level. Listing 
durations for single family houses fell over the reporting 
period, indicating a pickup in selling activity across the 
District. A contact in Oregon noted that the inventory of 
new homes remained at a low level. Commercial real 
estate activity picked up notably. Contacts in Eastern 
Washington reported that plans for the construction of a 
major e-commerce distribution center were announced, 
resulting in an anticipatory uptick in demand for commer-
cial space in the area. Contacts in the San Francisco 
Bay Area noted that office rents and occupancy rates 
rose moderately because of increased demand by tech-
nology companies. 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked up modestly over the reporting 
period. Loan demand increased overall, with contacts in 
the Mountain West and Central California reporting 
strong loan growth. In Oregon, demand for financing for 
various construction projects continued to increase. 
Deposit rates continued to edge up, resulting in a slight 
narrowing of net interest margins. Contacts noted a 
modest increase in the rate of mergers and acquisitions 
among small and medium-sized banks. ■ 


