The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
July 12, 2017 
June 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
based on information collected on or before June 30, 2017. This docu-
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded across all twelve Federal Reserve Districts in June, with the pace of growth ranging from 
slight to moderate. In addition, the majority of Districts expected modest to moderate gains in the months ahead. Con-
sumer spending appears to be rising across a majority of Districts, led by increases in nonauto retail sales and tourism. 
However, many Districts noted some softening in consumer spending, particularly in auto sales which declined in half 
of the Districts. Manufacturing and nonfinancial services activity continued to grow, with most Districts reporting modest 
to moderate gains since the last report. Loan demand was steady to increasing in most Districts. Residential and non-
residential construction activity was flat to expanding in most Districts. Most Districts cited low home inventory levels in 
certain market segments which were constraining home sales in many areas. Agricultural conditions were mixed 
across the nation as moisture conditions varied considerably; several Districts continued to report weakness in dairy 
and some crop sectors due to low prices. Energy activity generally improved since the last survey, particularly for oil 
and natural gas. Coal production remained sluggish although higher than year-ago levels.    
Employment and Wages 
Employment across most of the nation maintained a modest to moderate pace of expansion, although the Atlanta and 
St. Louis Districts noted flat employment levels. Labor markets tightened further for both low- and high-skilled positions, 
particularly in the construction and IT sectors. Contacts across a broad range of industries reported a shortage of quali-
fied workers which had limited hiring. Wages continued to grow at a modest to moderate pace in most Districts, and 
many firms attributed these wage gains to tighter labor market conditions. Wage pressures generally trended with 
employment conditions, and rising wage pressures were noted among both low- and high-skilled positions. A few Dis-
tricts also reported rising costs of benefits and variable pay.     
Prices 
Prices continued to rise modestly in the majority of Districts, and a few Districts noted that price pressures had eased 
slightly. Several Districts reported higher construction materials costs and freight prices, while gasoline prices fell. 
Retail prices held steady or slightly increased, and the manufacturing sector noted steady to modestly rising input 
costs. Low agricultural prices were causing stress for some farmers, although some food retailers reported improved 
margins due to lower commodity prices. Home prices continued to increase in most Districts.   
Boston 
Economic activity in the First District expanded at a 
modest pace in recent weeks. Hiring activity was mixed, 
proceeding at a moderate pace on average. Wage in-
creases remained moderate with not much variation. 
Prices were mostly stable with some noteworthy excep-
tions. Contacts were cautiously optimistic concerning 
prospects for further growth.    
 
New York 
Economic growth has picked up to a modest pace in 
recent weeks. Labor markets have tightened further, as 
hiring has picked up. Input cost pressures have become 
somewhat less widespread, while selling prices contin-
ued to rise modestly. Housing markets have strength-
ened, whereas commercial real estate markets have 
softened slightly. 
 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall, economic activity appeared to slow to a slight 
pace of growth, as consumer spending declined sharply 
for apparel, and demand softened for autos, new home 
construction, and nonresidential construction. Most other 
sectors continued to grow at a modest pace. On bal-
ance, employment and wages continued to grow mod-
estly, and prices grew only slightly.  
Cleveland 
Reports from business contacts were somewhat less 
positive, and the overall pace of growth was modest. 
Price and cost pressures eased slightly. Labor markets 
continued to tighten. Manufacturing activity increased, 
but at a slower pace, especially for consumer packaged 
products. Demand for IT services was particularly strong.  
Richmond 
Economic activity expanded modestly, but at a some-
what faster pace. The manufacturing sector improved 
further, which boosted the transportation sector as more 
goods were moved through ports and around the coun-
try. Retail sales increased and tourism and travel reports 
were mostly upbeat. Construction and real estate mar-
kets continued to improve modestly. Labor markets 
remained tight, and price increases were modest.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity modestly expanded since the previous 
report.  Labor market tightness continued. On balance, 
wage growth remained steady. Input costs were sub-
dued. Consumer spending softened. Home sales in-
creased and prices appreciated modestly. Nonresidential 
construction increased; however, multifamily construc-
tion showed signs of slowing. Manufacturing activity 
grew, albeit at a slower pace.    
Chicago 
Growth picked up to a moderate pace and prices rose 
modestly. Employment, business spending, and manu-
facturing grew at moderate rates, while consumer spend-
ing and construction and real estate activity increased 
modestly. Conditions were little changed in the financial 
and agricultural sectors. 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic activity has slightly improved since our previ-
ous report. Employers reported minimal hiring due to 
difficulties finding qualified candidates putting upward 
pressure on both wages and benefits. There were posi-
tive developments on consumer spending as contacts 
reported a rebound in sales after a string of weak re-
ports.  
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity increased modestly 
during the reporting period. Professional services, com-
mercial construction, manufacturing, energy, and mining 
saw growth, while employment was held back by tight 
labor availability. The already struggling agricultural 
sector weakened as severe drought conditions spread 
through the Dakotas and Montana. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity in the Tenth District expanded moder-
ately in June, and most sectors expected additional 
gains in the months ahead. Consumer spending, manu-
facturing, services, construction and energy activity 
increased since the previous survey. The pace of growth 
in the energy sector was anticipated to ease slightly. The 
agriculture sector remained weak, with subdued farm 
revenue and low commodity prices.  
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately in the Eleventh Dis-
trict, and outlooks remained positive. Growth in retail 
sales decelerated, but there were reports of sales im-
proving in energy-related areas and in the border region. 
Activity in the energy sector expanded further, partly 
driving increased manufacturing production. Demand for 
staffing services remained strong. Apartment demand 
improved following a sluggish first-quarter.  
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Overall price inflation was 
flat, while upward wage pressures strengthened. Sales 
of retail goods were modest, and growth in the consumer 
and business services sectors remained strong. Condi-
tions in the manufacturing sector improved. Activity in 
the residential housing market was robust. Conditions in 
the financial services sector remained solid.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the First District expanded at a modest pace on average, but reports were mixed across firms and 
industries. Revenues are up by moderate margins on average among manufacturing and retail contacts, with year-over-
year gains that varied from slight to robust. Software and information services firms reported year-over-year growth 
figures that ranged from a modest decline in one case to double-digit gains. Commercial real estate activity was flat or 
up slightly across the District, while residential real estate sales were held back by declining inventories despite robust 
demand. Some firms planned to increase headcounts by moderate or even large margins, while others expect to hold 
employment fixed. Planned wage increases remained moderate, and price increases were small to moderate, with 
some exceptions. Contacts expect either flat activity moving forward or further growth consistent with their own recent 
results. 
Employment and Wages  
Hiring plans among First District contacts ranged from 
flat to robust, and planned wage increases were stable 
at a slow-to-moderate pace. Some retail contacts found 
it slightly harder to hire workers, but were not much 
concerned by that fact. Employment was flat or increas-
ing at manufacturing firms. A furniture manufacturer 
reported difficulty in retaining production workers but not 
salespeople. A manufacturer of cardboard boxes was 
hiring additional workers without raising wages, but 
noted that finding qualified workers was difficult because 
production jobs increasingly involve using computers. 
Manufacturing firms reported year-over-year wage 
growth in the vicinity of 3 percent. A data storage firm 
plans to make double-digit percentage increases in its 
net headcount in 2017, while a healthcare IT firm ex-
pects a more modest 2 percent personnel increase. One 
enterprise software firm is keeping its headcount flat, but 
shifting its hiring focus to growth areas such as the inter-
net of things. Another software firm is hiring at a moder-
ate pace and has had to increase starting salaries for 
engineers and sales positions. Firms are struggling to 
hire engineers and fill technical positions in greater 
Boston. On average, software and IT firms are budgeting 
for moderate wage increases.  
Prices  
Reports on price movements were mixed. Most manu-
facturing contacts reported stable prices. However, a 
cardboard box manufacturer increased its prices by 10 
percent in response to a 10 percent increase in the price 
of linerboard, a key input, and a frozen fish manufacturer 
expects pollock prices to fall in the coming year. Retail 
output prices saw very little movement, although some 
retailers plan to post moderate price increases for premi-
um fall merchandise and small price increases for basic 
goods.  
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts reported that recent sales numbers re-
flect increases over one year ago ranging from roughly 2 
percent to almost 10 percent, results that helped balance 
lackluster sales in early 2017. All retail contacts feel that 
the outlook rests on positive consumer sentiment trans-
lating into actual sales. One noted that the movement of 
consumers away from in-store shopping and towards 
online shopping is accelerating faster than anticipated. 
For the first four months of 2017, the hotel occupancy 
rate for the Boston area was up 0.9 percent from the 
same period a year earlier, and the average room rate 
was up 1 percent. However, not including activity at new 
hotel rooms, the hotel occupancy rate for Boston was 
effectively flat year-over-year, a marked contrast to the 
robust annual increases seen over the last six years. At 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
the same time, contacts perceive that, between mid-May 
and late June, Boston experienced strong tourism activi-
ty. The recently concluded Sail Boston event boosted 
area restaurants in particular. The midyear outlook is 
that hotels will end 2017 with a net increase in annual 
revenues, but may not achieve the 5 percent increase in 
average room rates initially predicted for 2017.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of the 7 firms contacted, all but one reported higher 
sales. The exception was a drug company, which at-
tributed flat sales to increased competition. A cardboard 
box manufacturer reported 10 percent year-over-year 
growth resulting from increased e-commerce. A manu-
facturer of sensors reported strong sales growth largely 
due to demand from the auto industry. A manufacturer of 
power supply devices reported a major revision to capital 
spending plans. After many years of reconfiguring exist-
ing plants to meet demand, the firm will build a new, 
highly automated plant in New England, in order to save 
on labor costs and bring engineers in close proximity to 
production. The outlook among contacts remains posi-
tive but cautious. The drug manufacturer remained un-
certain about the prospects for the health care industry, 
and the sensor manufacturer expressed concerns about 
slower growth moving forward in the auto industry.  
Software and Information Technology Services 
Software and IT firms reported year-over-year revenue 
growth ranging from -2 percent to 10 percent. A data 
storage and security firm experienced strong revenue 
growth, spurred by the high cyber-threat environment. A 
healthcare software provider also had strong year-over-
year revenue growth. A manufacturing enterprise soft-
ware provider had flat revenue, but anticipates increased 
demand moving forward. Data backup and healthcare IT 
contacts were optimistic about future growth. Contacts 
expressed concerns and doubts about the impact of 
proposed national policy changes on business, and 
uncertainty related to health care policy was seen as 
putting a damper on business for health care IT firms.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Conditions in the First District’s commercial real estate 
markets were mostly unchanged in recent weeks. Office 
leasing activity remained very light in Hartford and light-
to-moderate elsewhere in the District. In Boston, leasing 
demand remains uneven across submarkets within the 
city. Investment sales demand held steady across the 
District, and Boston’s premier properties remain in favor 
among foreign investors. In both Portland and Provi-
dence, demand for industrial space exceeds the very 
limited supply, but the impetus for new construction 
remains low in light of high construction costs relative to 
rents. In Connecticut, however, plans were announced 
for construction of significant new warehouse space. 
Also, a modestly-sized user-built office building is slated 
for downtown Portland, and in and around Portland three 
hotel projects are underway. Contacts expect stable (if 
slow) leasing demand going forward, as well as ongoing 
changes in the retail landscape favoring entertainment 
and services over goods-selling businesses.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District head-
ed into the summer with continued upward pressure on 
prices and depleted inventories. Four of the six First 
District states reported year-over-year changes to May 
2017, while Vermont and the Boston area reported year-
over-year changes to April 2017. For single family 
homes, closed sales were down by moderate margins on 
average in four of the six states and in the Greater Bos-
ton area, but increased by moderate-to-robust margins in 
Rhode Island and Connecticut. The lower sales numbers 
were attributed to declines in inventories over the same 
period rather than weak demand—inventories declined 
year-over-year in all six states while median sale prices 
increased by modest-to-robust margins in all states 
except Vermont, which reported a moderate decline in 
prices. Pending sales increased in every reporting state 
but Rhode Island and the Greater Boston area. In Rhode 
Island, single family home sales posted an all-time high 
since the association began keeping records in 1998. 
For condos, closed sales increased in every state but 
Massachusetts and Maine. In a promising sign for inven-
tories, Massachusetts experienced an increase in new 
listings for the first time in over a year.  
Most contacts seemed optimistic about market activity 
and continued strong buyer demand, despite the low 
inventories. Many noted that low unemployment has 
helped spur consumer confidence, which contributes to 
demand for residential real estate. Despite the fact that 
interest rates have increased, contacts noted that rates 
are still relatively low and that prospective homeowners 
are eager to buy now before they increase more. Some 
expressed concern that continued upward pressure on 
prices will price out first-time home buyers.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has expanded at a modest pace since the last report, while labor markets have 
tightened further. Input price pressures have eased slightly, while selling prices have continued to rise modestly. Manu-
facturers noted a pickup in business activity, while the various service industries indicated mixed results. Consumer 
spending has picked up a bit since the last report, and consumer confidence has remained close to a cyclical high. 
Housing markets have strengthened, while commercial real estate markets were mixed but slightly softer. New residen-
tial construction activity has been steady at a subdued level, while commercial construction has picked up modestly. 
Banks reported that loan demand was steady to softer, while delinquency rates continued to decline.  
   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has continued to tighten since the last 
report. Contacts at employment agencies noted that 
hiring has picked up and that jobs have become harder 
to fill. A major New York City employment agency noted 
a pickup in hiring, especially from financial firms. In 
upstate New York, there has been a pickup in demand 
for both full-time and temporary workers—particularly for 
administrative and customer-care workers. Contacts also 
noted an ongoing shortage of software developers and 
skilled workers more generally.  
Manufacturers have continued to add jobs but at a 
somewhat slower pace than in the last report. Business-
es in the finance, wholesale trade, real estate and con-
struction sectors report that they are hiring, on net, while 
those in the restaurant & hotel industry indicated some 
cutbacks in staffing levels. Businesses in manufacturing 
and most service industries expected to add jobs, on net, 
in the months ahead.   
Overall, wages are reported to have risen moderately, 
though contacts in the transportation, warehousing, 
wholesale trade, and leisure & hospitality industries 
report more widespread increases in wages.    
Prices  
Businesses generally reported upward pressure on input 
prices but to a lesser degree than in the last report, while 
selling prices continued to rise modestly. Those in the 
wholesale and transportation industries reported modest 
increases in selling prices, on balance, while businesses 
in other sectors indicated little change.  
General merchandise retailers reported that prices have 
been steady, while New York City hotels indicated that 
room rates have slipped modestly. In contrast, Broadway 
theaters noted rising ticket prices, with the average price 
up 10-15 percent from a year earlier.    
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported that sales have weakened, on bal-
ance, while they expect business to be generally steady 
for the second half of the year. Retailers in upstate New 
York reported that both shopper traffic and sales have 
been flat at weak levels. A major retail chain noted that 
sales were roughly on plan, though they weakened a bit 
from May to June. Retail business in New York City, 
which had been particularly soft, improved slightly. In-
ventories were generally at or below normal levels, while 
prices were steady to up modestly.  
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that sales of 
new vehicles picked up in May and early June and were 
up from a year ago. Vehicle inventory levels have crept 
up, but dealers are generally optimistic about the out-
look. One contact noted that used vehicle sales have 
picked up, while another reports that they are steady. 
Retail and wholesale credit conditions were character-
ized as favorable, but credit remains tight on sub-prime 
auto loans.  
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) edged down in June but remained near its cycli-
cal high set in March.   
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has picked 
up substantially since the last report. Businesses in the 
wholesale trade and transportation industries, however, 
continued to report subdued growth. Similarly, while 
manufacturers remain broadly optimistic about the out-
look for the second half of this year, those in transporta-
tion and wholesale trade remain only mildly upbeat.    
Services 
Businesses in most service industries reported steady to 
moderately growing business activity. Contacts in profes-
sional and business services noted a pickup in activity 
and expressed widespread optimism about the near-
term outlook. Contacts in education & health services 
noted a slowdown in growth, while information industry 
contacts reported little change in activity.   
The leisure & hospitality sector has been mixed. A num-
ber of contacts have reported a pullback in activity, cou-
pled with increased pessimism about the outlook. While 
tourism activity in New York City has remained fairly 
buoyant, advanced travel bookings are reported to be 
down, especially from abroad. In general, visitors are 
reported to be spending less—partly reflecting a shift 
toward more domestic and fewer international visitors. 
On a more positive note, Broadway theater attendance 
and revenues were reported to be fairly strong in May 
and June. Tourism was described as strong in the Finger 
Lakes region of upstate New York.     
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have strengthened 
somewhat. Sales volume has picked up throughout the 
New York City area—particularly for moderately-priced, 
single-family homes in outlying areas. In contrast, sales 
activity has slowed a bit in parts of upstate New York, 
restrained by a lack of homes on the market. 
A real estate contact in upstate New York State reported 
continued escalation in home prices, with homes in more 
sought-after areas often selling for above the list price. 
Selling prices of both single-family homes and apart-
ments have also picked up in and around New York City, 
though prices of Manhattan condos and co-ops have 
risen only marginally. New York City’s rental market has 
remained mostly steady. Rents remain flat overall—
rising on smaller, less expensive units but declining on 
larger and pricier apartments. Landlord concessions 
have stopped rising but are more prevalent than usual.  
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
slightly softer on balance. The market for office space 
has been steady to slightly weaker: availability rates 
edged up, while asking rents slipped in New York City 
but were little changed elsewhere. However, the industri-
al market has strengthened further, with availability rates 
declining and asking rents up roughly 10 percent over 
the past year. In contrast, the market for retail space has 
continued to slacken, with vacancy rates rising to multi-
year highs and asking rents little changed. 
Both single-family and multi-family new home construc-
tion has been steady at a fairly subdued level, though 
there is still a good deal of multi-family development 
under construction. Commercial construction, on the 
other hand, has picked up. New office construction has 
expanded noticeably in northern New Jersey and New 
York City’s outer boroughs but has been fairly restrained 
in other parts of the District. Industrial construction has 
picked up in northern New Jersey but has remained flat 
and fairly subdued elsewhere.   
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium sized banks reported weaker demand 
for consumer loans, but no change in demand for resi-
dential mortgages, commercial mortgages, or commer-
cial & industrial loans. Refinancing activity decreased for 
all types of loans. Bankers reported slightly easier credit 
standards for residential mortgages, and unchanged 
standards in other loan categories. Bankers indicated 
narrowing spreads of loan rates over cost of funds for all 
types of loans. Respondents also noted an increase in 
the average deposit rate. Banks reported lower delin-
quency rates across all loan categories—particularly on 
consumer and residential mortgage loans.   ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District grew slightly over the current Beige Book reporting period — a retreat 
from modest growth that had occurred during the prior period. Manufacturing continued at a moderate pace of growth, 
while nonfinancial services, new home sales, and tourism continued to grow modestly. However, auto sales and con-
struction activity exhibited essentially no growth, if not a slight decline, and nonauto retail sales declined modestly. On 
balance, employment and wages continued to grow at a modest pace, while prices edged only slightly higher. Overall, 
firms appear to have lowered their expectations somewhat to modest growth over the next six months. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has continued at a modest pace of growth. 
Manufacturing firms reported little change in employment 
and in the average hours worked compared with the 
prior period. Employment indicators from nonmanufac-
turing firms were mixed, as contacts noted more net 
additions to full-time staff, fewer net additions to part-
time staff, and a slight increase in hours.  
On balance, wage pressures continue to be muted; the 
percentage of nonmanufacturing firms that noted rising 
wage and benefit costs is as low as any time in the past 
three years. Wage pressures continued to be greater in 
those markets with low unemployment rates.  
Pennsylvania staffing firms struggled to find qualified and 
committed workers. Staffing contacts reported spending 
more time and money on recruiting labor and refilling 
positions after the initial hire quit, sometimes after just a 
few days. Workers appear to have less loyalty to the job, 
and more job-hopping is showing up on résumés. How-
ever, one large retailer reported having no difficulty 
getting quality job candidates in locations throughout the 
District after raising its base wage last year.  
 
Prices  
On balance, price levels rose slightly as price pressures 
appeared to have eased off a prior modest pace. Of 
contacts responding, about two-thirds reported no 
change at all in prices paid and prices received. General-
ly, prices have held firmer for raw inputs to and interme-
diate goods from manufacturers, while nonmanufacturing 
contacts reported significant drops in prices paid for their 
inputs and received for goods sold.  
Retailers and food service providers noted that ongoing 
low commodity prices have helped their margins, while 
homebuilders are facing 20 percent higher lumber costs 
caused by trade tariffs against Canada. Contacts noted 
that the added cost can be more easily absorbed while 
building high-end homes, but can make low-end homes 
less viable to bring to market.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing firms continued to report 
moderate growth in general activity; however, the pace 
eased off once more. During the prior period, the pace of 
new orders lessened; this period, the pace of shipments 
slowed. Still, the pace of activity appears somewhat 
stronger than is typical of expansionary periods in the 
Third District.  
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
The makers of paper products, chemicals, fabricated 
metal products, and industrial machinery continued to 
note gains in activity; these were joined by gains report-
ed by the makers of electronic products. Firms in the 
primary metal sector appeared to be gloomier, noting 
reductions of new orders and shipments.  
Generally, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
growth over the next six months; however, the percent-
age of firms expecting future increases edged down 
slightly for employment, capital expenditures, and gen-
eral activity.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail contacts noted modest declines in sales 
overall, as apparel sales “continued to be hammered.” 
Operators of outlets and traditional malls have been 
buffeted by a surge in retail bankruptcies. Even conven-
ience store contacts noted that sales growth was below 
expectations, as lower-income households have contin-
ued to reduce spending.  
On balance, auto dealers reported a slight decline in 
year-over-year sales during the current period, with 
Pennsylvania sales edging up and New Jersey sales 
declining modestly relative to last year’s high levels. 
Falling used car prices have been a contributing factor to 
softer demand for new cars. Dealer profitability contin-
ued to be a struggle, and some dealers and analysts are 
revising year-end sales totals downward.  
Tourism activity continued to grow at a modest pace, 
according to several contacts. Delaware shore contacts 
noted exceedingly heavy traffic on the roads and signifi-
cant tourist spending, but that last-minute bookings had 
not lifted hotel occupancies as much as expected. Still, 
bookings remained ahead of last season. Atlantic City 
casino revenues also remained up over the prior year.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Service-sector firms continued to report modest growth 
in general activity, with some notable improvement in 
sales (or revenues) over the prior period. One large 
service-sector firm noted that growth remained slow and 
a bit below expectations, prompting the firm to institute 
discretionary delays in filling vacant positions. An area 
advertiser noted lower demand from local auto dealers, 
but more demand from the health-care and financial 
sectors.  
Expectations about future growth have ebbed further 
since the prior Beige Book period but have remained 
positive with a little over 50 percent of the firms anticipat-
ing increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported slight growth of overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) — a bit slower than the 
modest growth that had occurred during the prior Beige 
Book period. Commercial real estate loans and auto 
loans exhibited strong growth in loan volume; in contrast, 
mortgages and home equity loan volumes were essen-
tially flat, while commercial and industrial loan volumes 
declined. Credit card volumes are highly seasonal but 
have grown over the year at a modest rate and grew 
during this Beige Book period at a robust pace similar to 
the change observed over the same period last year.  
Banking contacts tended to describe the economy as 
stable and their loan portfolios as healthy with low delin-
quencies and few areas of concern.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders generally reported a slight decline in activ-
ity, following moderate growth in the prior period, alt-
hough one builder noted a pick-up in mid-June. Contacts 
reported ongoing difficulty in securing skilled labor but 
stated that as long as overall demand for new construc-
tion remains soft, so too will the wage pressures.  
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
continued to report modest growth of existing home 
sales, but no increase of inventories. In the Greater 
Philadelphia area, pending sales of houses (under con-
tract) dropped slightly. Overall, existing home prices 
continued to edge up with some variance across markets 
and price categories.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts reported essentially 
no change in construction activity, which had grown 
modestly last period, although individual markets do vary 
by sector and geography. One contact noted that the 
construction pipeline may have begun to diminish. Leas-
ing activity continued to exhibit little change overall. 
Rents were rising nearly everywhere for industrial/
warehouse space; contacts noted plenty of demand and 
that new buildings continue to lease up before comple-
tion. However, rent concessions have emerged for multi-
family units in the city of Philadelphia. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity across the Fourth District slowed to a modest pace during the reporting period. Labor mar-
kets continued to expand, with wage pressures noted primarily for high-skilled workers. Upward pressures on prices 
paid and received eased slightly. Contacts facing higher input prices experienced little pushback from customers when 
raising their selling prices. Consumer spending at brick-and-mortar establishments remained stable, while new motor 
vehicle sales rose. Production increased at manufacturing plants, although at a slower pace than in the previous report-
ing period. Nonfinancial services firms experienced moderate revenue growth overall, but demand was strong for IT and 
management consulting. Housing market activity picked up as year-to-date unit sales remained above year-ago levels 
and selling prices were higher. Activity in the commercial real estate market remains elevated. Lending pipelines were 
satisfactory, but contacts noted softer loan demand in select categories.  
Employment and Wages  
District payrolls continued to expand, although at a 
slightly slower pace than in the previous reporting period. 
Increases were notable in the construction and nonfinan-
cial services industries. Brick-and-mortar retailers again 
noted decreases in staffing levels. Banking contacts 
mentioned tight labor market conditions and wage pres-
sures for skilled workers, including personnel in compli-
ance and statistical modeling positions. Building contrac-
tors experienced difficulty hiring workers in skilled trades, 
especially drywallers. Construction contacts also noted 
increased hiring for management and office staff posi-
tions. Freight haulers mentioned difficulty recruiting 
enough qualified drivers despite increasing driver wages 
recently. Manufacturing contacts experienced little 
change in hiring, which was mostly replacements or 
normal turnover. Staffing firms noted an increase in the 
number of listings for both temporary and permanent 
positions, especially for occupations requiring specific 
skills or advanced degrees, while workforce develop-
ment officials observed rising job placements for workers 
with less than four-year degrees.  
Prices  
Upward pressures on prices paid eased during the peri-
od. Some manufacturers remarked that changes in input 
costs were modest. Construction contacts mentioned 
higher prices for lumber and other materials such as 
copper and steel, and several contacts saw rising con-
struction subcontractor prices. Freight haulers saw rising 
tire prices. Similar to observations made in the previous 
period, contacts in the manufacturing and construction 
sectors noticed they were able to pass on increased 
costs to customers. Freight haulers reported improved 
pricing ability, and some contacts cited rising rates be-
cause of tightening capacity. Retail contacts observed 
little change in shelf prices except for some declines in 
food items. Similarly, retailers saw little change in vendor 
prices except for lower prices for some raw food ingredi-
ents.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending at District brick-and-mortar retailers 
remained largely unchanged from that of the previous 
reporting period. Sales of fresh food items were doing 
well, whereas electronics were selling poorly. Sales of 
apparel items at large chain retailers were soft. Retail 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
inventories were generally in good shape. Year-to-date 
sales of new motor vehicles through May increased 
more than 3 percent compared to those of the same 
period a year ago. Dealers saw higher-than-usual inven-
tories because of lower demand for passenger cars.   
Industrial Production 
Manufacturing output grew at a slight pace during the 
reporting period, somewhat slower than earlier. The 
small pickup in demand from energy-related companies 
was more than offset by a decline in the motor vehicle 
and consumer packaged-product industries. Demand 
from the construction sector remains strong. Year-to-date 
production through May at District auto assembly plants 
fell about 9 percent when compared to that of the same 
time period during 2016. The large majority of manufac-
turing contacts were allocating capital spending budgets 
toward maintenance, although some contacts were also 
allocating monies toward new equipment and technolo-
gy.  
Reports through May indicate that the number of drilling 
rigs operating in the District continued to increase com-
pared with that of a year ago. A contact remarked that 
investment in regional oil and gas is up, and both pipe-
lines and mid-stream plants are being built. Contacts 
credited increases in natural gas demand in part to addi-
tional demand in gas-fired power generation. Contacts 
indicated that coal production declined during the report-
ing period because of reduced demand, but they antici-
pate higher output in the coming months.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Year-to-date unit sales through May of new and existing 
single-family homes increased 2 percent compared to 
those of a year earlier. The average sales price rose 5 
percent. Homebuilders described the housing market as 
improving at a steady pace, with higher unit sales com-
pared to a year ago. One builder attributed strong sales 
to a strengthening labor market. Another builder ob-
served that although demand is quite adequate, it is 
difficult to meet demand across price points because of 
rising costs for land, lot development, and construction.   
Nonresidential real estate activity remains strong at 
elevated levels. Nonresidential contractors report strong 
demand for education and healthcare related buildings 
and for commercial buildings for ecommerce distribution. 
In contrast, contacts noted low demand for retail space 
in both enclosed malls and shopping centers. Contacts 
reported little change in overall inquires and backlogs 
from the previous reporting period. 
Financial Services 
Bankers generally reported that loan demand for the first 
half of 2017 is below expectations. Businesses and 
consumers may be looking for more clarity on potential 
changes to the tax code and regulatory reform before 
proceeding with spending plans. While most lending 
categories are slowing, CRE loans and residential pur-
chase mortgages are performing relatively well. While 
most contacts cited stable consumer loan demand, some 
contacts noted softer demand, especially for credit 
cards, and indicated that consumers are deleveraging. 
Some contacts stated that credit standards for consumer 
loans, including credit cards, have eased somewhat. 
There has been some credit tightening for financing 
multifamily and retail developments and for subprime 
auto loans. Bankers noted generally improving loan 
quality for both commercial and consumer loans.  
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector grew at a 
moderate pace during the period. Strongest demand was 
for IT, management consulting, and logistics services. IT 
consulting contacts noticed opportunities among retailers 
that are incorporating ecommerce into their business 
models.  
The pickup in freight volume seen during the past few 
months has diminished; however, the volume remains 
above year-ago levels. Freight haulers saw increased 
demand from oil and gas and strong demand from con-
struction material producers.  ■  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded modestly, and at a somewhat faster pace since the last report. Labor demand 
remained firm but hiring was constrained by worker shortages. Prices rose slightly, on balance. Manufacturers’ ship-
ments increased but new orders softened due to a typical seasonal slowdown. The volume of freight moving through 
district ports was robust and continued to increase, while trucking firms reported renewed momentum in shipments. 
Retail sales increased and reports on tourism and travel spending were mostly upbeat. Home sales were up, despite 
labor shortages in homebuilding and low existing home inventories. On balance, commercial construction and real 
estate leasing picked up moderately. Loan demand increased, and while overall credit quality was said to be good, 
some lenders expressed concern over lenient terms for auto loans and leases. Non-financial services firms saw modest 
increases in revenues. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks, and firms increased their focus on retaining and 
recruiting qualified employees. Employment agencies 
reported a moderate seasonal increase in new job open-
ings across all sectors, but only a slight increase in 
applicants. Wage increases remained modest for most 
firms. Several transportation industry executives, howev-
er, noted recent moderate wage increases and stronger 
wage pressures compared to the previous report. Em-
ployment agencies said that entry-level salary offers 
increased at a higher rate across all job categories, since 
the previous report.  
Prices  
In general, prices were little changed to up modestly 
since our previous report. According to our most recent 
manufacturing survey, input prices increased slightly, 
and a little faster than final goods prices. Meanwhile, our 
services survey showed slight price increases overall, 
with the pace of growth in retail goods outpacing that in 
non-retail services. However, transportation executives 
noted that spot freight prices were rising, in some cases 
significantly. Most agriculture and energy prices varied 
slightly, with the notable exception of a moderate in-
crease in metallurgical coal prices.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing firms reported modest increases in ship-
ments, while new order volumes slowed somewhat due 
to a typical summer slowdown. Machinery manufacturers 
and producers of primary and fabricated metal noted 
improved business conditions in recent weeks. Addition-
ally, textile mills indicated higher production. A few firms 
reported increased productivity resulting from recent new 
equipment purchases, and they expected further efficien-
cy gains once employees were trained on operating the 
equipment. Most firms expect orders to increase in the 
next six months.  
Ports and Transportation 
Since our last report, freight volumes through district 
ports were very strong and continued to increase mod-
estly, on balance. Moreover, the gains were reported to 
be evident in imports and exports, and were widespread 
across shipping categories. Meanwhile, momentum 
appeared to be building in truck transportation as execu-
tives in the industry reported stronger than seasonal 
increases in shipments during the second quarter. In 
addition to being more robust, growth had also become 
less volatile, with sequential increases in shipments in 
the March through June timeframe, following a pro-
longed period during which freight was “up one month, 
down the next.” While trucking firms expect some    
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
seasonal slowing in the third quarter, most executives 
indicated that conditions feel better than they have in a 
very long time. 
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales increased in recent weeks, with somewhat 
mixed results across segments. Hardware and home 
improvement stores reported strong sales, including for 
big-ticket and seasonal items. A home furnishings store 
attributed an increase in sales to more people buying 
and building homes. Auto sales were mixed, with a deal-
er in central Virginia reporting a pickup in new car sales 
in June, while a dealer in western North Carolina saw a 
decline over the month. Clothing and shoe sales were 
said to be flat to down in recent weeks, despite a good 
Father’s Day weekend.   
Tourism in coastal North Carolina was stronger in recent 
weeks relative to the same time last year, prompting 
higher retail sales and restaurant spending. Rental rates 
remained flat, but included more offers of extra ameni-
ties. In western North Carolina, growth in tourist activity 
had slowed relative to the fast-paced growth of prior 
years, but room rates were holding steady as hotel sup-
ply continued to grow. An outdoor recreation facility in 
western Virginia experienced increased bookings from 
both leisure and business groups. In Washington, DC, 
conference activity remained at normal seasonal levels, 
while average daily rates on hotels increased.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased modestly since 
the previous report. Generally, real estate agents report-
ed that buyer traffic was down due to a typical seasonal 
slowdown. Inventories remained low, and Realtors were 
working harder to attract sellers into the market. Average 
days on the market decreased modestly. Brokers report-
ed that demand for lower to mid-range homes remained 
strong, with multiple offers and rising selling prices. 
Residential developers also noted that homes in the 
$200,000 price range were in high demand. Homebuild-
ers continued to report that new home starts were con-
strained by labor shortages.  
On balance, commercial real estate leasing and con-
struction rose moderately. Industrial leasing transactions 
and speculative construction picked up, while retail leas-
ing and sales remained strong. Office leasing was still 
constrained in most locations, with some agents report-
ing rising demand for Class A space. Rental rates in-
creased modestly in most industrial, retail, and office 
markets. Retail and mixed-use construction remained 
strong. Multifamily construction continued at a moderate 
pace, although a few contacts noted fewer announced 
new projects in urban areas with previous high levels of 
multifamily development. Lastly, residential and commer-
cial real estate prices continued to rise at a modest pace, 
overall.  
Banking and Finance 
On balance, loan demand continued to grow at a moder-
ate pace. Residential mortgage demand remained solid 
while refinance and home equity lending softened slight-
ly. On the commercial side, loan demand continued to 
grow moderately; however, multifamily lending slowed 
slightly and a rising number of retail establishments were 
reportedly seeking to lease rather than purchase. Auto 
lending remained robust, but some bankers expressed 
concerns over an industry-wide trend towards negative 
equity financing and extended purchase and lease 
terms. Competition among banks intensified slightly, 
according to a contact in North Carolina, as credit unions 
have begun competing for commercial deals in some 
markets. Credit standards were generally unchanged 
and credit quality remained strong. Short term interest 
rates rose slightly but long term rates remained stable.  
Non-Financial Services 
Services firms generally reported modest revenue 
growth, according to our most recent survey. Specifical-
ly, engineering, architectural, accounting, and housing 
related services such as landscaping, home improve-
ment, and pest control reported revenue growth in recent 
weeks. Demand for self-storage units rose moderately. A 
few contacts in D.C. and Maryland cited concerns over 
slowing federal procurement spending.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Reports on energy markets were somewhat positive. 
Coal production was little changed in recent weeks but 
rose moderately compared to the same time last year. 
Exports remained elevated, particularly for thermal coal. 
Meanwhile, agriculture conditions were unchanged as 
the planting season got underway. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, reports from Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity continued to expand at a 
modest pace from mid-May through June. The outlook among businesses remains positive as most expect an increase 
in activity over the next year. District firms continued to report difficulties filling positions of all calibers. Wage growth, 
aside from wages for jobs in high demand, remained steady. Businesses reported muted non-labor input costs. District 
merchants noted sales activity softened since the previous reporting period. The pace of vehicle sales slowed from a 
year ago. The tourism sector continued to report softness in activity in parts of the District. Reports from residential 
brokers and builders indicated home sales increased from year earlier levels. Real estate contacts also noted that home 
prices modestly appreciated. Commercial real estate contacts continued to cite improved demand for most property 
types and construction increased from a year ago. Manufacturing activity grew, albeit at a slower pace than the previous 
report. Bankers noted credit continued to be available for qualified borrowers.  
Employment and Wages  
Contacts continued to describe a tightening labor market 
in which they struggled to find and hold onto quality 
workers, a narrative that has broadened across job types 
and skill levels, from construction, information technolo-
gy (IT), finance, and transportation to low to mid-skill and 
professional positions. Several contacts maintained that 
labor market tightness was a major barrier to growth. 
Some contacts reported that planned changes to immi-
gration policy made it more difficult to hire and retain 
high-skill immigrants, including engineers, technicians, 
and IT workers. Firms continued to deploy various tactics 
in an effort to find and develop pipelines of talent and 
retain workers; for example, developing partnerships 
with workforce development entities, schools, and mili-
tary bases, expanding internal and external training and 
apprenticeship programs, strengthening recruiting ef-
forts, and seeking out retirees to return to work. Some 
firms also enhanced compensation and benefits packag-
es, particularly variable pay, healthcare contributions, 
flexible work arrangement offerings, and added vacation 
time. Additionally, firms continued to explore or deploy 
technology as viable future replacements for labor, espe-
cially in hard-to-fill jobs. Contacts report that wage pres-
sures remained mostly stable, however there were also 
continued reports of rising starting salaries for lower-skill 
entry-level positions and ongoing upward wage pressure 
for some high-skill, low-supply positions.    
Prices  
In general, growth in input costs was restrained. Some 
contacts reported ability to pass along commodity input 
increases as they occurred. According to the Atlanta 
Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey, year-over-
year unit costs were up 1.9 percent in June. Survey 
respondents indicated they expect unit costs to rise 2.0 
percent over the next twelve months.   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retail contacts reported that sales levels were 
softer than expected in May. Retailers noted that overall 
sales activity during Memorial Day weekend was at or 
slightly below expectations and sales levels from interna-
tional shoppers weakened since the last report. Automo-
tive dealers reported a slow-down in the momentum of 
auto sales from a year ago.  
On balance, tourism and hospitality contacts across the 
District reported slightly softer than expected activity 
during the start of the summer season, which they attrib-
ute poor weather conditions. However, with the excep-
tion of South Florida, hotel occupancy and revenue per 
available room were up year over year. Year-to-date 
Mississippi casino gaming revenues decreased com-
pared with the same time period last year. The outlook 
among most contacts for the remainder of the summer 
season remains optimistic. 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports on activity in May from District residential real 
estate contacts continued to signal modest but steady 
growth. Most builders said construction activity increased 
from the year-ago level. Brokers and builders continued 
to report that home sales were up relative to one year 
earlier. The majority of builder and broker contacts noted 
that buyer traffic was up from the previous year’s level. 
Many residential contacts indicated that inventory levels 
were down from the year-ago level. Both builders and 
brokers reported modest gains in home prices. Home 
sales expectations remained positive in May, with most 
brokers and builders anticipating that sales would hold 
steady or increase slightly over the next three months 
compared to the year-earlier level. Most builders expect 
construction activity to match or exceed the current pace 
over the next three months. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts reported 
improvements in demand that have resulted in rent 
growth and increased absorption, but they continued to 
caution that the rate of improvement varied by metropoli-
tan area, submarket, and property type. The majority of 
commercial contractors indicated that the pace of non-
residential construction activity had increased from one 
year ago, with many reporting increasing backlogs. 
While most reports indicated that the pace of multifamily 
construction matched or exceeded the year-ago level, a 
growing share of contacts are reporting that multifamily 
construction is down. Looking forward, the majority of 
District commercial construction contacts expect nonresi-
dential construction activity to increase, while expecta-
tions for the pace of multifamily construction was mixed.   
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing contacts continued to report 
growth in overall activity. New orders and production 
levels continued to rise, but at a slower pace than the 
previous reporting period. Purchasing agents indicated 
that supply delivery times continued to get longer and 
finished inventory levels increased slightly. The outlook 
for future production decreased somewhat, with just 
under half of firms expecting higher production levels 
over the next six months.  
Transportation 
Most District transportation contacts reported an expan-
sion of activity during the reporting period. Logistics 
companies noted steady growth in ecommerce ship-
ments, and trucking contacts reported notable increases 
in freight volume and tonnage. District ports cited contin-
ued strength in shipments of automobiles and machin-
ery, and record container volumes. Rail contacts report-
ed a slight uptick in intermodal traffic; however, year- 
over- year rail traffic was relatively unchanged since the 
previous report.   
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers. Competition for loan customers increased 
among financial institutions. Overall loan growth varied – 
some institutions reported flat to slow growth while oth-
ers indicated strong growth. Small business loans were 
up year over year at some institutions. Credit card usage 
increased yet delinquency levels remained stable. De-
posit levels were up at many institutions.   
Energy  
Reports from energy contacts indicated that Tropical 
Storm Cindy caused limited disruptions to oil and gas 
operations in the Gulf of Mexico. Contacts noted that 
trends in continued gains in energy efficiency has slowed 
growth among residential and commercial gas custom-
ers. Reports indicated that natural gas demand was 
below normal and inventories remained above average 
levels. Contacts reported that Gulf Coast refineries ran at 
record high levels and crude oil inventories remained 
above average levels.  
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. By 
mid-June, rains had significantly improved drought con-
ditions in much of the District. However, recent heavy 
rainfall due to Tropical Storm Cindy exacerbated areas’ 
crop moisture conditions in much of the District that were 
already categorized as abnormally moist to excessively 
wet, and there were early indications of some crop dam-
age. During the reporting period, the District’s cotton 
crop was mostly on par with the five-year averages and 
soybean planting in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennes-
see was ahead of their five-year averages. The June 
forecast for Florida oranges was up slightly from May but 
remained considerably lower than last season's produc-
tion. On a year-over-year basis, prices paid to farmers in 
April were up for cotton, soybeans, and broilers but 
remained down for corn, rice, beef, and eggs.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District picked up to a moderate pace in late May and June and respondents’ 
outlooks for growth over the next 6 to 12 months also improved some. Prices rose modestly. Employment, business 
spending, and manufacturing grew at moderate rates, while consumer spending and construction and real estate activity 
increased modestly. Conditions were little changed in the financial and agricultural sectors. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a moderate rate over 
the reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue 
at that pace for the next 6 to 12 months. Contacts indi-
cated that the labor market was tight and that it was 
generally harder to fill high-skilled positions than low-
skilled positions. Hiring was focused on professional and 
technical, sales, and production workers, and there was 
an increase in the number of contacts hiring sales work-
ers. A staffing firm that primarily supplies manufacturers 
with production workers reported a slight decline in 
billable hours. Wage growth was modest overall, with 
increases more likely for high-skilled occupations. A 
number of contacts with union workers reported wage 
increases that were well above inflation. Many contacts 
said that the cost of benefits increased. 
 
Prices  
Overall, prices again rose modestly in late May and 
June. Retail prices increased slightly, with the exception 
of gasoline and food prices, which declined a bit. Materi-
als costs were little changed overall and freight costs 
were up slightly. 
 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Non-auto retail sales were up modestly, with 
growth in the building materials, gardening equipment, 
food and beverage, and personal care segments. Tour-
ism and entertainment contacts reported that the sea-
sonal pickup in activity was proceeding as expected. The 
pace of auto sales changed little on net, with reports of a 
pickup in May followed by a slowdown in June. Used-
vehicle sales were steady. Contacts indicated that low 
fuel prices continued to shift the vehicle mix toward light 
trucks and away from cars. Low fuel prices also helped 
spur increased sales of recreational vehicles. 
 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending remained at a moderate 
pace in late May and June. Retail inventories generally 
were at comfortable levels, although stocks appeared 
high for certain models of autos. Manufacturing invento-
ries were at comfortable levels overall, though invento-
ries at steel service centers remained low. Growth in 
capital spending continued at a moderate pace, and 
contacts expected growth to continue at that pace for the 
next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were primarily for replacing 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
industrial equipment, IT equipment, and renovating 
structures, though there was an increase in the number 
of contacts reporting spending for expansion. Demand 
for electricity was little changed and shipping volumes 
increased slightly. 
 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased modestly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased slightly across home types and locations. Home 
sales increased a bit and house prices increased mod-
estly on balance. Demand varied by price range, with 
strong demand and tight inventories for homes under 
$500,000 and modest demand and abundant inventories 
for houses over $500,000. Nonresidential building 
changed little. A highway construction contractor in 
Illinois reported that they would stop work on all state-
funded projects at the beginning of July because the 
state does not have a budget and that they have already 
laid off some workers who were preparing for new pro-
jects. The pace of commercial real estate activity re-
mained strong and even picked up a bit, led by gains in 
the industrial sector. Activity was especially strong in 
West Michigan, and a contact there reported that activity 
had increased moderately over the reporting period. 
Commercial rents edged up, as vacancy rates and the 
availability of sublease space decreased slightly. 
 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production continued to grow at a moder-
ate rate in late May and June. Growth in steel production 
remained at a moderate pace, as increased demand 
from the energy and machinery industries offset softer 
demand from the auto industry. Heavy machinery manu-
facturers themselves reported increased demand, driven 
by the energy and mining sectors, particularly from over-
seas customers. Heavy truck manufacturers also report-
ed a pickup in demand. Sales for specialty metals manu-
facturers increased overall, with greater demand coming 
from the aerospace, energy, and defense sectors. That 
said, some contacts noted that recent growth had been 
uneven, which raised concerns about future sales pro-
spects. Production in the auto sector declined some, but 
remained at a solid level. 
 
 
 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Financial market participants noted 
that volatility continues to be low. Business loan demand 
ticked up overall, and there was little change in loan 
standards or quality. Contacts reported an increase in 
demand for capital equipment and real estate loans. 
Demand for consumer loans was little changed on bal-
ance. Home loan volume rose faster than the usual 
spring seasonal pattern and pricing was little changed. 
Home loan quality remained strong. Demand for auto 
loans decreased slightly and there was no notable 
change in quality. 
 
Agriculture 
The agricultural sector continued to operate under stress 
in late May and June, with reports of some crop and 
dairy operations exiting or filing for bankruptcy. Crop 
conditions and maturity lagged that of last year’s bumper 
crop, but the overall harvest is still expected to be 
around trend. Contacts expected a smaller corn harvest 
than last year, but there is a small chance that the soy-
bean harvest will be larger because the wet spring led 
some farmers to switch acreage from corn to soybeans. 
Hog prices moved up, but cattle prices dropped. Milk 
prices were lower, which contributed to mounting losses 
for many dairy operations. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/publications/cfsbc 

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts suggest economic conditions have slightly improved since our previous report. Employers report-
ed little hiring and moderate wage pressures due to difficulties finding qualified candidates. Retailers indicated that 
consumer spending modestly improved since our previous report. Manufacturing contacts continued to report modest 
growth. Real estate contacts indicated that, while demand remained strong, residential activity continued to decline amid 
supply constraints. Banking contacts indicate generally strong growth in loan demand from both businesses and house-
holds. Reports from the District’s agriculture sector suggest modest improvement after flooding last period, but that 
generally conditions remain weak amid low prices. 
Employment and Wages  
Anecdotal evidence suggests employment is little 
changed since the previous report. Many contacts re-
ported a desire to hire, but they have been unable to find 
suitable employees. Manufacturing contacts in Louisville 
and Memphis reported difficulties finding experienced or 
qualified employees, with some citing candidates' inabil-
ity to pass drug tests or to consistently report to work. 
Hospitality contacts in Louisville noted that both entry-
level and experienced workers have been challenging to 
find, and skilled positions in technical fields such as 
information technology and engineering remain difficult 
to fill. 
Contacts reported moderate growth in wages since the 
previous report, as tightness in the labor market has 
resulted in upward pressure on wages. In addition, sev-
eral contacts reported enhancing benefits in an effort to 
attract employees. However, some employers noted 
factors holding back wage increases. A science and 
technology contact reported that rising costs of benefits 
have limited increases in wages, and a hospitality con-
tact in Louisville noted that wages remain unchanged 
because any increases would result in higher prices 
charged to customers. 
 
Prices  
Price pressures in the District remained moderate. Low 
commodity prices continue to put pressure on the agri-
culture sector. Since the previous report, cash prices of 
wheat and sorghum have increased moderately and 
prices of rice have increased slightly; there was no 
change in the price of coal, and prices of soybeans, 
corn, and cotton decreased modestly. A contact in Little 
Rock reported farm equipment prices are down. 
Across the District, home prices continued to increase 
moderately. Contacts reported increased price pressures 
on new homes from rising construction costs due to the 
shortage in labor supply. Price changes of construction 
materials were mixed. Contacts in the Little Rock area 
reported solid wood prices decreased modestly due to 
increased supply, whereas a contact in the Memphis 
furniture industry reported higher wood and foam prices 
were putting upward pressure on the price of their fin-
ished goods. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate consumer spending has grown modestly 
since our previous report. May sales tax collections in 
Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, and Tennessee were 
higher than one year ago. Multiple auto dealers reported 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
an increase in sales, albeit at a slower pace relative to a 
year ago. Furthermore, dealers in north Mississippi 
reported a shift in demand toward used vehicles. Hospi-
tality contacts in Missouri indicated that business activity 
has increased since our previous report, while hotel 
occupancy rates continue to decline in downtown Louis-
ville. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report. Manufacturing activity was stronger than 
one month earlier in both Missouri and Arkansas, alt-
hough the pace of growth slowed sharply in Missouri and 
slowed slightly in Arkansas. In addition, contacts in the 
furniture manufacturing industry reported a decrease in 
orders. Several companies reported new capital ex-
penditure and facility expansion plans in the District, 
including firms that manufacture fabricated metal prod-
ucts, paper products, and plastic and rubber products. A 
contact in the aluminum industry reported record high 
capital expenditures.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports of plans in the service sector have been posi-
tive, on balance, since the previous report. Firms that 
provide transportation, warehousing, utilities, and infor-
mation technology services reported plans to expand 
facilities and hire employees. In the St. Louis area, re-
ports from the education sector were negative, as two 
major universities announced layoffs due to budget cuts 
and declining enrollment. News from the healthcare 
industry is mixed. Some providers are cutting costs, 
leading to closures in healthcare-related businesses; 
however, other providers continue to expand operations 
in urban areas. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has declined modestly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for May decreased slightly from the previous 
month in most of the District’s four major MSAs. Local 
real estate contacts continued to report that significant 
shortages in inventory have hindered sales while de-
mand remains strong. Most contacts indicated that 
changes in interest rates have had little to no impact on 
the market. 
May permit activity in District MSAs declined slightly 
relative to the previous month. A Memphis contact indi-
cated that little new construction is occurring, while a 
Little Rock contact noted that homebuilding in the region 
is approaching levels consistent with fundamentals. 
Commercial real estate activity has remained flat since 
the previous report. Demand for industrial properties 
continued to be robust, and a Louisville contact reported 
that there is essentially no warehouse space available in 
the area. Multifamily demand remained stable, but some 
contacts reported an increase in demand for senior living 
facilities. Contacts reported that rising interest rates have 
had very little impact on commercial real estate markets. 
Commercial construction activity continued to be strong. 
Several Memphis contractors indicated that they are 
optimistic about their future prospective projects. Indus-
trial construction activity remained robust, particularly in 
Louisville. Contacts across the District expressed con-
cerns over the number of new hotels under construction.  
Banking and Finance 
Lending activity in the Eighth District has expanded at a 
robust pace since the previous report and markedly 
outpaced the nation. Commercial real estate loan vol-
umes grew at a strong pace, rising by 14 percent on a 
year-over-year basis. District bankers reported that 
consumer loans—which comprise credit card, auto, 
medical, and student loans—experienced robust growth 
and have risen by 28 percent relative to year-ago levels. 
Commercial and industrial lending exhibited moderate 
growth over the period, though slightly softer than in 
recent quarters. District bank deposits expanded at a 
moderate pace and have been growing at roughly three 
times the national rate over the past three years. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agricultural conditions improved modestly by the end of 
June as row-crop farms recovered from flooding. Con-
tacts reported a few Arkansas fields had still not dried up 
enough to replant and many fields would be replanted 
with soybeans because other crops’ planting windows 
had passed. As of June, the percentages of District corn 
and soybeans rated fair or better were below their 2016 
values, but corn improved slightly from a month prior. 
The percentage of rice rated fair or better was above the 
year- and month-ago values, while the cotton percentage 
was slightly better than a year prior and slightly worse 
than a month prior.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined slightly 
from April to May, with seasonally adjusted coal produc-
tion decreasing 3 percent. However, production was still 
7 percent higher than one year ago.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Since the last reporting period, the Ninth District economy experienced modest growth. Employment grew modestly, 
held back by poor labor availability. Wages grew moderately to strongly, while price pressures remained modest. The 
District economy showed growth in professional services, residential construction, manufacturing, energy, and mining. 
Commercial and residential real estate, along with commercial construction, were mixed. Tourism activity was flat over-
all, while consumer spending fell, and agricultural conditions weakened.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew modestly since the last report, held 
back by poor labor availability. While total employment 
grew across District states, it grew by less than normal 
for this time of year. Job demand continued to be strong. 
A Minnesota construction contact said, “Everyone is 
hiring in all markets.” A Montana staffing contact said 
second quarter orders overall were “stagnant,” but June 
orders have seen an uptick. A staffing firm in 
southeastern Minnesota said job openings over the 
previous two months grew by 14 percent over the same 
period a year earlier, and a general labor shortage had 
clients “concerned that this was going to impact growth 
of their business.” Tourism businesses across the 
District reported difficulty finding workers; three 
Minnesota resorts reported close to 200 unfilled 
openings. Initial unemployment insurance claims over 
the most recent six-week period dropped by 13 percent 
in the District over the same period a year earlier, with 
continuing claims dropping by 10 percent. An employer 
survey in District states found a small increase in the 
share of companies expecting to hire more staff in the 
coming quarter compared with the current quarter; the 
share of firms expecting to cut staff was low and roughly 
unchanged. Job losses continued from large retailers, 
and hiring in eastern North Dakota continued to be soft, 
while employers in the western, oil-producing region of 
the state were reportedly “hungry to hire,” according to a 
regional source.   
Wages grew moderately to strongly overall since the last 
report. A central Minnesota contact said wage pressure 
is “a big deal for companies with entry level jobs,” and a 
regional survey there found that half of respondents 
were increasing wages to deal with a tight labor market. 
Average wages for 18 Minnesota construction unions 
saw annual increases of between 3.3 percent and 5 
percent in recent three-year contracts negotiated in May. 
A Minnesota food processing company increased union 
worker wages by close to 3 percent annually over four 
years; a Montana natural resource company increased 
wages by a total of 5 percent over a two-year period. In 
North Dakota, state budget difficulties have resulted in a 
freeze in salaries for many state and higher education 
workers.  
Prices  
Price pressures remained modest since the last report. 
Pressure on construction materials prices has eased, 
according to industry contacts. Recent bids for a large 
highway construction project in Minnesota came in 18 
percent below expectations. Iron ore prices have fallen in 
recent months, while scrap metal prices, by contrast, 
have been on an upward trend since late last year. Retail 
fuel prices in District states decreased slightly in June 
compared with a month earlier. Most prices received by 
farmers decreased in May from a year earlier, with the 
exception of hay, milk, cattle, chickens, and eggs.  
 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending was down slightly since the last 
report. May sales tax collections in South Dakota were 
down 2 percent from a year earlier. Recent sales of 
passenger vehicles decreased, according to auto dealer 
contacts, while sales of trucks increased slightly. In 
contrast, a contact at a North Dakota mall reported that 
sales were up slightly. A regional big box retail chain and 
a supermarket chain were planning to add stores. 
Tourism activity was flat overall since the last report.  
May visits to national parks in the District were down 2 
percent from a year earlier. Demand for hotel lodging in 
Minnesota was flat in May from a year earlier. In 
contrast, gaming revenues in Deadwood, S.D., 
increased 8 percent in May.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. According to preliminary 
results from an annual survey of District services firms, 
respondents reported that sales, productivity, and 
employment all increased over the past year; firms 
expected more growth over the coming year. An 
accounting firm reported increased activity, even as the 
busy tax season subsided. Contacts in the trucking 
industry reported flat activity over recent months.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was mixed since the last 
report. According to industry figures, commercial building 
and nonbuilding construction activity in May was lower 
than a year earlier. A separate database of construction 
projects out for bid across several District states through 
mid-June was flat compared with a year earlier. But a 
Minnesota industry association contact said most 
members “seem to be having good years with full or 
potentially full calendars of work.” Commercial permit 
values in May grew considerably over a year earlier in 
several larger cities in the Minneapolis-St. Paul region, 
including the core cities; however, they were flat or lower 
in a large majority of other larger cities in the District. In 
Rochester, Minn., construction was described as “fairly 
subdued,” but was expected to change. Residential 
construction grew modestly. Single-family permits in May 
rose in only a small majority of large District cities 
compared with a year earlier. Multi-family construction 
continued its strong activity, with more than 900 units 
permitted in May across the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro, 
the highest monthly figure in almost four years.  
 
Commercial real estate was mixed since the last report. 
A contact in Rapid City, S.D., said transaction activity 
there has been strong. “Apartment complexes get sold 
within a week of listing.” Retail vacancy was described 
as “pretty stable,” while office vacancy appeared to be 
rising thanks to new space coming to the market. Retail 
vacancy rates have continued to rise slowly in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, thanks to a significant amount of 
space vacated by large retailers. However, another 
source noted that retail space under construction was 
lower than a year earlier and grocery expansion 
continued to eat up available space. Despite strong 
construction activity, multi-family vacancy rates remained 
low in the region, and rents were rising. Residential real 
estate was mixed. Closed sales rose in northern and 
western Wisconsin counties located in the District 
compared with a year earlier; sales also grew in Sioux 
Falls, S.D. Sales were mixed in Montana—strong in the 
Flathead region, flat in Missoula, but lower in Helena. In 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, May sales fell by almost 2 percent, 
while sales in the rest of the state were flat, attributed 
largely to low inventories of homes for sale.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions produced by Creighton University indicated 
increased activity in May compared with a month earlier 
in Minnesota and the Dakotas. Several contacts in the 
metal-fabricating industry reported very strong recent 
activity; one contact had record sales in May and was 
expecting a similar level in June. A dealer of capital 
equipment and services reported that orders were up. An 
electronics producer announced a major new facility in 
Minnesota.     
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions weakened since the 
previous report. Severe drought conditions affected the 
Dakotas and parts of Montana, hampering crop progress 
and triggering disaster relief payments to ranchers in 
some areas. By contrast, crop conditions in the eastern 
parts of the District were mostly good or excellent as of 
late June. Activity in the energy and mining sectors 
increased slightly since the last report. District oil and 
gas exploration activity increased in late June from a 
month earlier, even as crude prices fell. Recent 
production at Minnesota iron ore mines has been 
running well ahead of levels a year earlier.  ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District expanded moderately in June, and most sectors expected additional gains in the 
months ahead. Consumer spending increased at a moderate pace, with retail, restaurant and tourism contacts reporting 
stronger sales than the previous survey period. Manufacturing activity picked up moderately, and professional, high-
tech, and transportation contacts reported strong increases in sales. Capital expenditures were anticipated to rise in the 
manufacturing, professional and high-tech industries, while wholesale trade and transportation firms expected a modest 
decline. Residential and commercial construction activity rose in June, but home sales declined slightly as low invento-
ries constrained sales. The number of active drilling rigs continued to increase, but the pace of growth was expected to 
slow in coming months. District farm revenue remained subdued as most agricultural commodity prices remained low. 
Employment and wages increased modestly since the previous survey period, and contacts expected moderate wage 
growth in the coming months. Input prices were up modestly in most sectors, and selling prices were mixed. 
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours continued to 
increase modestly in June, and contacts expected addi-
tional gains in the months ahead. Contacts in the retail, 
wholesale trade, professional and high-tech services, 
tourism, health services and real estate sectors reported 
a modest increase in employment since the previous 
survey period, while employment held steady in auto 
sales and restaurants. All sectors anticipated higher 
employment levels in the coming months except for the 
auto sector which expected a slight decrease. Average 
employee hours rose since the previous survey in the 
services and manufacturing sectors and were above 
year-ago levels. Several contacts noted a shortage of 
commercial drivers, salespeople, and service workers. 
Wages rose modestly in most sectors in June, and mod-
erate wage growth was anticipated in the coming 
months.  
Prices  
Input prices were up modestly in most sectors compared 
to the previous survey period, while selling prices were 
mixed. In the retail sector, selling prices edged up, and 
input prices continued to rise, but at a slower pace than 
in the prior survey. Restaurant contacts reported slight 
declines in both input and selling prices, but expected 
both prices to pick up in the months ahead. Input prices 
in the transportation sector rose at a modest pace, while 
selling prices increased slightly. Prices in the construc-
tion sector rose modestly, with slight increases anticipat-
ed in the coming months. Manufacturers reported slight 
decreases in finished goods prices, while raw material 
costs continued to edge higher. Manufacturers anticipat-
ed modest growth in both finished goods and raw materi-
al prices over the next few months. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased moderately, and addition-
al moderate gains were expected in the months ahead. 
Retail sales rose at a moderate pace and were well 
above year-ago levels. Several retailers noted stronger 
sales for lumber and building materials, while luxury and 
higher-priced products sold poorly. Retail contacts antici-
pated sales to grow moderately in the next few months, 
and inventory levels were expected to remain stable. 
Auto sales stabilized in June after declining for several 
months and were slightly above year-ago levels. Dealer 
contacts anticipated a moderate increase in auto sales in 
the months ahead. Restaurant sales picked up moder-
ately since the previous survey, and modest gains were 
expected in the coming months. District tourism activity 
increased moderately and remained above year-ago 
levels. Tourism contacts anticipated moderate increases 
in activity during the summer months.   
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moder-
ate pace in June, and most other business contacts 
reported improved sales. Manufacturers reported moder-
ate growth in production, particularly for aircraft, plastics, 
and chemical products. Shipments and new orders ex-
panded modestly, and activity was considerably higher 
than a year ago. Manufacturers’ capital spending plans 
were mostly positive, and firms’ expectations for future 
activity remained strong.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
transportation firms reported strong sales increases, 
while wholesale trade contacts reported a more modest 
growth in sales. Most firms expected a moderate im-
provement in sales in the next six months. Professional 
and high-tech firms expected capital spending to in-
crease moderately heading forward, while wholesale 
trade and transportation firms anticipated a modest 
decline in capital expenditures. 
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity expanded slightly since the 
previous survey period, and respondents expected fur-
ther gains moving forward. Residential home sales de-
clined slightly from the previous month, with sales of low-
and medium-priced homes outpacing sales of higher-
priced homes. Residential home inventories moved 
modestly lower from year-ago levels. Contacts expected 
low inventories to constrain sales in the next few months 
and anticipated sales would be flat. Residential construc-
tion activity grew slightly, as housing starts and traffic of 
potential buyers rose, while construction supply sales 
were stable. Respondents expected overall residential 
construction activity to increase moderately in the 
months ahead. Commercial real estate activity continued 
to expand modestly as vacancy rates declined and ab-
sorption, completions, construction underway, sales, 
prices and rents increased. A modest expansion in the 
commercial real estate sector was anticipated in the 
coming months. 
Banking 
A majority of banking respondents indicated stable de-
mand for commercial and industrial, commercial real 
estate, residential real estate, and consumer installment 
loans. Demand for agricultural loans was mostly mixed in 
June. Most bankers indicated loan quality was un-
changed compared to a year ago, and expected loan 
quality to remain essentially the same over the next six 
months. Credit standards remained largely unchanged in 
all major loan categories, and a majority of respondents 
reported stable deposit levels.  
Energy 
Energy activity rose at a modest pace, while expecta-
tions eased slightly but remained positive. The number 
of active oil and gas drilling rigs continued to increase 
across the District, but respondents expected the pace of 
growth to slow in the coming months due to flat prices 
and the continued oversupply of oil. Contacts also re-
ported a moderate decline in access to credit, particular-
ly from banks, while private equity continued to be readi-
ly available. Expectations for future oil and gas prices 
moderated somewhat as a result of the continued in-
crease in U.S. oil production and ample natural gas 
supply. Furthermore, contacts said that although the oil 
and gas prices needed to increase drilling substantially 
has continued to decline modestly, it remained above 
their current one-year ahead price expectations.  
Agriculture 
District farm revenue remained subdued since the previ-
ous reporting period as most agricultural commodity 
prices remained low. Corn and wheat prices increased 
slightly, but were lower than a year ago due to elevated 
global supplies. Similar to last year, District contacts 
reported that corn and wheat prices remained below 
levels generally thought to be profitable and financial 
stress continued to increase at a gradual pace for many 
producers. Soybean prices declined slightly from the 
previous reporting period and were also slightly less than 
a year ago. Livestock operators were slightly more opti-
mistic than earlier, as cattle prices increased modestly 
from a year ago. Hog prices also increased modestly 
from the previous reporting period as global demand for 
meat products remained relatively strong.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy continued to expand at a moderate pace over the past six weeks. Manufacturing output 
rose, and activity in nonfinancial services increased. Growth in retail sales slowed, while auto sales dipped. Housing 
demand grew, lending activity increased, and the energy sector saw continued improvement. Crop conditions were 
mostly favorable. Employment and wages rose, as did prices. Outlooks remained positive, although some contacts 
noted uncertainty regarding changes in trade and healthcare policy as well as tax reform. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose moderately, and wage pres-
sures were similar to the last report. Manufacturers 
added to payrolls, with some noting that labor shortages 
were pushing up wages. Hiring in the services sector, 
including retail, continued. The construction labor market 
remained tight, particularly in Dallas-Fort Worth and 
Austin. Two staffing firms cited wage pressures across 
most skill levels, while two reported that rising wage 
pressures were limited to higher-skilled positions. Con-
tacts noted labor market tightness throughout the oil and 
gas supply chain and continued to cite upward wage 
pressures particularly for experienced personnel and for 
certain skills sets.   
Prices 
Selling prices increased at a slightly slower pace than in 
the prior report. Some oilfield services firms noted a 
weaker outlook for margins as costs were rising at a 
faster pace than selling prices. Accommodation and food 
services contacts noted higher prices. Staffing firms saw 
stable billing rates, while airlines noted higher fees and 
ticket prices. Cotton prices slipped in June on rising 
expectations of strong cotton production this year. Retail 
gasoline and diesel prices fell over the reporting period 
following the decline in oil prices. 
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector slowed over the 
past month. Among durables, output growth in primary 
metals and machinery manufacturing strengthened, but 
production was flat for fabricated metals and high-tech 
manufacturing. Food manufacturers reported an in-
crease in demand. There were reports of strength in 
energy-related manufacturing activity, but exports re-
mained a source of weakness for manufacturers who sell 
internationally. Overall, outlooks stayed positive. A cou-
ple of contacts said they were uncertain about how long 
the current strength in activity would last.  
Refinery utilization rates along the Gulf Coast increased. 
Refiner margins in 2017 will likely be lower than previ-
ously expected, reflecting large product inventories and 
lower expectations of U.S. consumption growth. Chemi-
cal producers noted healthy global demand and good 
margins. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales continued to rise, although at a slower pace 
than the prior period. Some contacts noted that in-store 
sales continued to be weak. There were a few reports of 
sales improving along the Texas-Mexico border and in 
energy-related regions. Auto sales fell during the report-
ing period. Auto lenders have tightened credit amid rising 
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
delinquencies. Outlooks among retailers generally im-
proved compared with the prior report. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services expanded moderately 
over the past six weeks. Demand for staffing services 
generally increased, with all contacts noting higher year-
over-year activity. Placements of health care profession-
als generally remained high. Contacts saw a pickup in 
orders for mining-related work in East Texas and cited 
broad-based demand for white-collar workers in Dallas-
Fort Worth. A contact in Houston noted surprisingly 
strong demand for entry- to mid-level placements from 
oil and gas firms.  
Professional and technical service firms saw revenue 
gains during the reporting period, with several firms 
noting a pickup in activity. Accommodation and food 
services contacts also noted slight increases in reve-
nues, although there were some reports of persistent 
weakness in demand. Airlines said passenger demand 
held steady over the past six weeks. Domestic travel 
remained stable, while activity along transatlantic and 
South American routes increased.  
Transportation and warehousing firms noted higher 
revenues and an increase in cargo volumes since the 
last report. Rail cargo rose, led by strong gains in ship-
ments of fracking sand and grains, although shipments 
of petroleum products and motor vehicles continued to 
decline. Parcel shipments and seaport cargo increased, 
while air and trucking freight volumes were flat. Outlooks 
among nonfinancial services firms remained fairly opti-
mistic, although some contacts expressed concern about 
economic and political uncertainty. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Homes sales continued to trend upward during the re-
porting period. Contacts in Austin, Dallas-Fort Worth and 
Houston noted that sales of low- to mid-priced homes 
mostly remained strong, however, sales at the higher-
price points varied by submarket. Home prices were flat 
to up, and more builders were focusing on bringing mod-
erately-priced products to the market.  
Apartment demand improved and occupancy edged 
higher in the second quarter, following a generally slow 
first quarter. Leasing activity picked up in Houston where 
overall market conditions were beginning to stabilize, 
and landlords were able to reduce rent concessions on 
select floorplans. Rental rates rose, with Dallas-Fort 
Worth seeing the fastest growth. Outlooks were positive 
and contacts expected continued, gradual improvement 
in Houston’s multifamily market. Transaction volume 
appeared to have slowed for multifamily properties as 
there was not much inventory on the market for sale. 
Office demand in Dallas-Fort Worth remained solid and 
rent pressure persisted, although rental rates at the very 
high end have been relatively flat. One contact ex-
pressed some concern about the elevated level of office 
construction in the metroplex. 
Financial Services 
Loan demand increased over the past six weeks, alt-
hough at a slightly slower pace than in the previous 
reporting period. Growth in commercial real estate and 
commercial and industrial loan volumes slowed. Resi-
dential real estate loan balances expanded at a faster 
rate than in the previous reporting cycle, while consumer 
lending declined slightly. Deposit volumes expanded, 
and lenders cited higher net interest margins as well as 
higher rates on loans. Contacts remained largely opti-
mistic regarding future business activity and loan de-
mand; however, several continued to express concern 
about the regulatory environment. 
Energy 
Demand for oilfield services continued to improve, and 
oilfield services firms noted increased utilization of their 
equipment. Drilling activity rose further, and exploration 
and production firms reported an increase in oil and gas 
production. Several contacts said that the pace of in-
crease in the rig count may not be sustainable and that 
they expect it to taper off or even plateau past mid-2017. 
Outlooks remained positive, although contacts were less 
optimistic compared with the previous report. 
Agriculture 
Moisture levels remained favorable across the district, 
boosting crop conditions. The wheat harvest was wrap-
ping up, and production was down sharply from last year 
because of lower yields and fewer acres planted. While 
farmers were generally feeling positive about 2017 row 
crop production, they remained concerned about low 
crop prices and financial strain from not being able to 
cover production costs. Export demand for U.S. cotton 
will likely not be as strong this year due to average crop 
quality and higher global supply. The cattle industry 
continued to benefit from very strong beef demand, both 
domestically and internationally. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-May 
through June. Overall price inflation was flat, while upward wage pressures strengthened. Sales of retail goods were 
modest, and growth in the consumer and business services sectors remained strong. Conditions in the manufacturing 
sector improved, and activity in the agriculture sector picked up to a modest pace. Contacts reported robust activity in 
residential real estate markets, and activity in the commercial sector picked up. Conditions in the financial services 
sector remained solid. 
Employment and Wages  
On balance, wage pressures ticked up, and conditions 
in the labor market tightened further during the reporting 
period. Wage pressures for skilled software engineers 
intensified further as competition for programmers with 
experience in cybersecurity and cloud computing re-
mained fierce. Demand for unskilled warehouse employ-
ees in the transportation and logistics services sector 
increased. Contacts reported that they increasingly filled 
job openings with older workers who were reportedly 
seeking health-care benefits or supplemental income. 
Shortages of labor and increasing wage costs fueled 
investments in automation in the agriculture industry. 
Sluggish sales growth and rising compensation costs 
slowed the pace of hiring in the restaurant industry. 
Prices  
Overall, price inflation was flat over the reporting period. 
Prices of construction materials picked up. Hotel rates 
firmed as tourism demand remained strong. Overall 
prices for consumer electronics edged down slightly. 
However, increased demand for computational memory 
buttressed prices of some manufactured components. 
Prices for cloud computing services declined as data 
centers achieved greater economies of scale. Increased 
capacity in renewable energy generation held down 
energy price inflation. Overall, prices of agricultural 
commodities slipped as the pace of supply growth out-
paced that of demand. 
Retail Trade and Services 
On balance, retail sales were modest over the reporting 
period. Contacts reported that, while retail sales picked 
up overall, the shift in consumer preferences toward 
online purchases slowed sales at traditional brick-and-
mortar retailers. Declines in gasoline prices reportedly 
boosted sales of light trucks. Inventories of automobiles 
grew as demand softened further, and contacts ex-
pected sales to remain weak for some time.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
generally grew at a strong pace. Business demand for 
security, cloud, and analytic services continued to boost 
sales in the technology industry. E-commerce sales 
supported strong volume growth in the transportation 
industry. Tourism demand remained strong, although 
contacts noted that continued uncertainty surrounding 
immigration policy slowed international bookings at 
hotels in Southern California. Restaurant sales re-
mained sluggish, and contacts expect the sluggishness 
to continue through the end of the year. 
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector improved some-
what, but uncertainty around fiscal, trade, and immigra-
tion policies tempered views on future growth. Increas-
es in demand for memory on consumer devices boost-
The Beige Book ■ June 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
ed production of semiconductors, and contacts expect 
double-digit growth through the end of the year. Demand 
for primary and fabricated metals increased, buoyed by a 
pickup of business investment and solid residential and 
commercial construction. Production of manufactured 
pharmaceuticals expanded moderately. Deliveries of 
commercial aircraft slowed to a modest pace, but orders 
rose from the same period last year. One contact report-
ed that improved sales at some manufacturers boosted 
their expected capital investments.  
 
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector picked up to a modest 
pace over the reporting period. In the Central Valley of 
California, yields of nuts and row crops were up over the 
previous growing season. Ample water supplies boosted 
cherry harvests. On balance, improved global economic 
conditions nudged up demand for some agriculture 
products, particularly pork. Increased global production 
pushed raisin inventories higher, reducing profitability for 
some growers. Demand for electricity was flat, and per-
sistent surpluses hampered profitability. Contacts report-
ed that financial distress at many independent power 
generators continued to propel industry consolidation. 
Use of fossil fuels, particularly coal, in energy generation 
continued to decline, while demand for renewables con-
tinued to be robust. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate market activity picked up to a robust pace. 
Residential construction activity continued to be strong in 
much of the District, slowed only by a lack of available 
land and labor. Inventories of new homes dropped fur-
ther. One contact in California reported extremely high 
presales in the residential market. Supply shortages 
continued to fuel strong price increases, and affordability 
remained a concern in most metropolitan areas. Com-
mercial construction activity was solid. Contacts reported 
an uptick in commercial investment aimed at remodeling 
and repurposing large retail spaces for health-care and 
entertainment services. Financing conditions for com-
mercial projects tightened slightly. 
 
Financial Institutions  
On balance, conditions in the financial services sector 
remained solid. Loan demand softened slightly, although 
contacts in the Pacific Northwest noted that, after a soft 
first quarter, lending activity picked up briskly in that 
region. Credit quality, while strong by historical stand-
ards, deteriorated slightly for commercial and industrial 
and auto loans. Deposits continued to increase but at a 
slower pace than in previous months. Asset quality re-
mained solid, and capital levels were at all-time highs. 
Net margins remained compressed, hindering bank 
profitability, and contacts reported that community banks 
continued to consolidate. ■ 


