The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
March 1, 2017 
February 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
based on information collected on or before February 17, 2017. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Reports from all twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicated that the economy expanded at a modest to moderate pace 
from early January through mid-February. Consumer spending expanded modestly since the last report. Retail sales 
increased at a subdued pace across most of the nation, with a number of Districts noting an ongoing shift from in-store 
to internet purchasing. Auto sales varied widely, but were said to be up in most Districts. Tourism activity was mixed 
but mostly stronger. Manufacturing activity accelerated somewhat, with most Districts characterizing the pace of growth 
as moderate. The energy sector showed modest growth in early 2017, and transportation activity was steady to some-
what higher across the nation. Home construction and sales continued to expand modestly in most Districts, while 
residential rental markets were mixed. Home prices were steady to up modestly in most Districts, and a number of 
Districts noted low inventories of existing homes. Commercial real estate construction grew modestly, and sales and 
leasing activity grew moderately. Lending activity was steady to somewhat higher. Businesses were generally optimis-
tic about the near-term outlook but to a somewhat lesser degree than in the prior report. 
Employment and Wages 
Labor markets remained tight in early 2017, with some Districts noting widening labor shortages. Employment grew 
moderately in most of the nation, though three Districts characterized growth as modest and two reported that it was 
little changed. A number of Districts noted that staffing firms were seeing brisk business for this time of year, and one 
noted more conversions from temporary to permanent workers. In general, wages in most Districts rose modestly or 
moderately, with a few reporting some pickup in the pace of wage growth. A number of Districts noted that shortages of 
skilled workers—particularly engineers and IT workers—were driving up their wages, and there were also some reports 
of labor shortages in the leisure and hospitality, construction and manufacturing industries.  
Prices 
Pricing pressures were little changed from the prior report. Most Districts reported that selling prices were up modestly 
or moderately, though four indicated that prices had largely leveled off. Input prices were up modestly, on balance. 
Energy prices and farm prices were mixed but mostly steady, on balance, while prices for construction materials 
climbed in a number of Districts. Overall, businesses said they expected both input prices and selling prices to increase 
modestly in the months ahead.  
Boston 
Business contacts in most sectors reported modest to 
moderate year-over-year increases in activity in recent 
weeks. Staffing firms, by contrast, cited modest declines 
in revenues. Some respondents expressed concern 
about policy changes in the new administration and 
associated uncertainty. Most contacts nevertheless cited 
a positive outlook. 
New York 
Economic activity has accelerated to a modest pace. 
Labor markets have strengthened, hiring has picked up, 
and wages continued to rise modestly. Input cost in-
creases have become more widespread, and selling 
prices have accelerated somewhat. Housing markets 
have continued to weaken at the high end, while com-
mercial real estate markets have picked up. 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall, economic activity continued to rise modestly 
with pickups to growth emerging from manufacturers and 
homebuilders. However, activity was essentially flat in 
several other sectors. Many contacts remained cautious-
ly optimistic even as their uncertainty increased. In gen-
eral, employment, wages, and prices continued to rise at 
a modest pace.  
Cleveland 
Economic activity, which had picked up some after the 
election, continued to rise at steady pace into February. 
The expansion was attributed to rising consumer and 
business confidence, although this confidence is only 
reflected in a limited increase in business spending. 
Retaining high-skilled workers is increasingly difficult. 
Product pricing pressures diminished slightly. 
Richmond 
Economic activity grew moderately since the previous 
Beige Book. Manufacturers reported increased ship-
ments, along with stronger growth in new orders and 
greater capacity utilization. Additionally, record volumes 
of container traffic passed through the ports in recent 
weeks. Commercial leasing increased, particularly for 
industrial and retail space. In commercial construction, 
multi-family and mixed use development dominated.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity expanded modestly. The labor market 
remained tight. Overall, wages and non-labor cost pres-
sures were subdued. Retailers cited flat sales, while auto 
sales increased. Home prices increased modestly. De-
mand for commercial real estate continued to improve. 
Manufacturers noted an increase in new orders and 
production.  
Chicago 
Growth picked up to a moderate pace. Employment, 
wages, business spending, and manufacturing produc-
tion all grew at moderate rates, consumer spending 
increased modestly, and construction and real estate 
activity rose slightly. Financial conditions were little 
changed, prices increased modestly, and farm incomes 
improved slightly.  
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have continued to expand at a 
modest pace. Manufacturing contacts reported an uptick 
in activity in the first quarter, while auto dealers reported 
a slight decline in sales. The general outlook for 2017 
among business contacts remained optimistic, even 
improving slightly since mid-November. 
Minneapolis 
Economic activity grew modestly. Employment rose, but 
certain retail sectors saw significant closures and layoffs. 
Activity in North Dakota slowed, though activity in the 
Bakken was improving. Winter tourism conditions were 
spotty. Manufacturing activity and outlook improved. 
Commercial construction slowed, but residential con-
struction had a strong January. Home sales were mixed 
across metro regions. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity continued to expand modestly, and 
contacts in most sectors expected additional gains in the 
months ahead. Retailers and auto dealers anticipated a 
pickup in sales in the next few months, and manufactur-
ers’ expectations for future activity were at their highest 
levels in over twelve years. The energy sector continued 
to expand, but the agriculture sector remained weak. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately, and outlooks re-
mained optimistic. The energy sector noted improved 
demand and signs of a pickup in hiring. Manufacturing 
and service-sector activity continued to expand, although 
there was increased uncertainty surrounding the new 
administration’s policy changes. Loan activity increased 
and housing demand remained solid.  
San Francisco 
Economic activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace. Sales of retail goods picked up, and activity in the 
consumer and business services sector slowed slightly 
to a moderate pace. Manufacturing conditions remained 
mixed, and activity in the agriculture sector was largely 
unchanged. Activity in the housing market was un-
changed from the prior period, but remained strong.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
First District businesses contacted in early February reported modest to moderate increases in activity from a year 
earlier. Retailers cited flat or single-digit increases in sales, while two-thirds of responding manufacturers saw revenue 
gains. Staffing firms mostly saw slight year-over-year declines in revenues, attributable in part to tight labor supply. 
Commercial real estate markets in the region were steady, with “good but not great” office leasing activity in Boston, 
Portland, and Providence. Residential real estate markets across the region saw increased median sales prices and 
mixed sales results, partially attributable to ongoing inventory shortages. Across most sectors, input and selling prices 
were stable, although staffing firms have raised bill and pay rates. While some responding firms expressed concern 
about increased uncertainty, most continued to say they were upbeat about 2017. 
Employment and Wages  
Retail firms cited a continuing tight labor market for 
positions involving information technology. Retailers 
planning to open new stores expect to hire sales associ-
ates and front-office personnel in line with that growth. 
Manufacturing respondents reported that employment 
was up, although for most it was a very minor change. 
Manufacturers continued to say they had difficulty finding 
skilled engineers and one added that the shortage of 
engineers was a problem overseas as well. No manufac-
turers reported any significant wage pressure. Among 
responding staffing firms, all observed strong overall 
labor demand and tight labor supply. Two firms men-
tioned lower demand from the manufacturing sector; 
sectors with particularly low labor supply were IT, ac-
counting, and healthcare. Staffing firms indicated that bill 
and pay rates had increased since the previous quarter; 
most reported little pushback to increasing bill rates.  
Prices  
Retailers indicated that selling prices and vendor prices 
were level or up 1 percent to 2 percent. Manufacturers 
reported no exceptional pricing pressure from either 
customers or suppliers. A manufacturer of milk products 
said that it was the most stable pricing environment in 
the industry in 10 years. A chemical manufacturer noted 
that increased global production of olefins had driven 
down the price. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts consulted for this round reported that 
year-over-year sales growth in January to mid-February 
ranged from flat to low single-digit increases. One furni-
ture retailer reported that its January sales were up 4 
percent year-over-year, but severe winter weather in the 
Northeast during the first two weeks of February de-
terred shoppers. Demand for footwear, outerwear, wom-
en’s apparel, and outdoor goods was reportedly strong, 
but there was some softness in sales of men’s and chil-
dren’s apparel. Contacts expect to see modest growth 
(in the low single digits) in 2017.  
Boston area hotels posted an 81.1 percent occupancy 
rate and another consecutive record high daily average 
room rate for 2016. Based on advance hotel bookings, 
projections for 2017 were similarly upbeat. However, 
some hotel and restaurant groups feel that the executive 
order limiting travel from certain countries may have 
adverse business effects as the United States may not 
be perceived as a welcoming country. Adding this worry 
to other concerns raised by a strong U.S. dollar, the 
possible effect of Brexit on the British exchange rate, 
and the outcomes of upcoming elections in key Europe-
an countries creates some significant uncertainty about 
how the tourism sector will fare in 2017.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of nine manufacturing contacts, six reported sales gains 
versus the same period a year earlier, two noted little 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
change and one reported lower sales. For those report-
ing growth, it was generally stable. One of the firms 
reporting no growth said it reflected an exceptionally 
strong start to 2016.  
Although contacts were generally positive about the near
-term outlook, many expressed concerns about policy 
changes from the new administration. Three mentioned 
that the border adjustment tax would present a problem 
for them. A manufacturer of semiconductor equipment 
said that restrictions on the H1B visa program would 
affect its ability to staff positions. Another said that un-
certainty about policy was the problem; for example, a 
border adjustment tax would have a big effect on where 
they located future production facilities and they would 
be reluctant to commit to new investment without some 
resolution of the issue. One contact noted that a risk in 
the coming year was that a plateauing of sales in the 
auto industry would lead to discounting of new cars and 
resulting pricing pressure on suppliers.  
Staffing Services 
New England staffing services contacts reported mixed 
changes in year-over-year revenue. Unlike recent re-
ports, most firms saw declining year-over-year revenue; 
nonetheless they said that the economy remained strong 
and they were optimistic about the future of their firms. 
Facing supply shortfalls, most contacts were trying out 
new ways to fill their open positions, including partnering 
with local non-profits, offering sign-on bonuses, and 
increasing their social media presence. While all firms 
expressed optimism about the next few months, several 
were concerned about policy uncertainty with the new 
administration. One healthcare staffing firm, for example, 
lost a substantial number of listings a few weeks ago 
when one of its clients issued a hiring freeze in Boston, 
waiting to see what happens with Obamacare.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity was mostly unchanged in 
the First District. In Connecticut, office leasing activity 
was limited while industrial leasing was steady if not 
robust, and one contact expects further development of 
large retail fulfillment centers in the state in 2017. De-
mand for industrial property appeared to increase more 
broadly across the District, driving new build-to-suit 
construction in numerous locations. In Boston, Portland, 
and Providence, office leasing activity was described as 
good but not great, and vacancy rates remained low to 
very low. A Boston contact says that the city’s office 
absorption pace slowed in recent months, a fact attribut-
ed partly to a longer-term trend among employers of 
reducing the space allotted per worker. Office construc-
tion remains limited across the First District, and contacts 
cite high building costs and a modest demand outlook as 
restraining factors. Boston’s investment sales market 
saw steady demand and prices remained high by histori-
cal standards, but investors continued to express caution 
over the future direction of prices, especially in light of 
rising interest rates. Construction activity continued to 
increase in Rhode Island but was concentrated in multi-
family, hospitality, and infrastructure projects. Investment 
sales remained strong in Portland but continued to cool 
in Connecticut. Contacts offered mixed reports on the 
retail leasing environment: the region’s mid-market malls 
saw increased store closings while demand for core 
urban retail and high-end mall space remained strong. 
Contacts are cautiously optimistic that fundamentals will 
hold steady or improve in 2017.  
Residential Real Estate 
The end of 2016 continued recent trends for residential 
real estate markets in the First District. Closed sales for 
single-family homes increased in three of the six First 
District states and decreased, though only moderately, in 
the other three and in the Boston metro area. (Five of the 
six First District states and Boston reported changes 
from December 2015 to December 2016, while Maine 
reported year-over-year changes to January 2017). For 
condos, closed sales increased in four states and de-
creased modestly in Massachusetts, New Hampshire 
and the Boston metro area. Despite sales being down 
year-over-year, a Boston contact reported that the opti-
mism going into 2017 is “overwhelming.” Record num-
bers of homes were sold in December in Rhode Island 
and in 2016 as a whole in Maine. Pending sales were 
also generally up, which indicated a good outlook going 
into 2017. Many contacts again cited low inventory as a 
strain on the market. Inventory decreased for single-
family homes and condos in every reporting region.  
Median sales prices rose year-over-year for single-family 
homes and condos in every reporting state and the 
Boston metro area. A Rhode Island contact commented 
that “as prices rise, more people will see gains in home 
equity which will give them more freedom to move. That 
should provide some relief to our supply shortage.” Over-
all, contacts were optimistic about housing markets 
going into 2017. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has picked up since the last report, expanding at a modest pace, and labor 
markets have strengthened. Increases in both input costs and selling prices have become more widespread. Manufac-
turers noted a brisk pickup in business activity in early 2017, while service-sector contacts have continued to report 
steady to moderately expanding activity. Consumer spending has been subdued in recent weeks, despite a surge in 
consumer confidence. Housing markets have been mixed, with weakness continuing at the high end, while commercial 
real estate markets were steady to stronger. Residential construction has remained sluggish, though office construction 
has picked up slightly and industrial construction remains fairly robust. Banks reported that loan demand retreated and 
that delinquency rates rose modestly.    
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has strengthened in early 2017. Hiring 
activity has picked up—especially among service firms. 
In particular, businesses engaged in education and 
health, information, professional and business services, 
and wholesale trade reported that they have increased 
staffing levels. On the other hand, manufacturers report 
steady employment, and leisure and hospitality firms 
mostly indicated steady or declining employment. Busi-
nesses in almost every industry sector plan to add staff 
in the months ahead, on net.  
Contacts at employment agencies reported that the labor 
market has remained tight and that hiring activity has 
been fairly brisk for this time of year. One contact in 
upstate New York noted a recent pickup in hiring at 
manufacturing and tech firms, while an agency in New 
York City reported brisk hiring from small to medium 
sized financial firms.   
Contacts in most industries reported continued modest 
wage growth, though contacts in the leisure and hospital-
ity sector noted a more significant pickup. Contacts at 
major employment agencies across the District report 
that starting salary offers have generally been steady to 
rising modestly, though they have risen more noticeably 
for some high-skill workers that are in short supply. 
While it is too early to assess any overall effects on 
wages and employment resulting from the January 1 
increase in New York State’s minimum wage schedules, 
a couple of contacts in the leisure and hospitality indus-
try indicated that they have faced some challenges.  
Prices  
Business contacts in all major industry sectors reported 
widespread increases in input prices—generally more so 
than in the last report. Contacts in most industries antici-
pate further increases in the months ahead, except in the 
transportation sector, where input costs are expected to 
remain steady. Selling prices are reported to be rising in 
the wholesale trade and leisure and hospitality industries 
but generally stable in other sectors, notably retail trade.  
 
Consumer Spending 
Retail merchandise sales were generally characterized 
as sluggish in January and early February. However, on-
line sales have reportedly been robust, with one major 
chain noting double-digit percentage growth over the 
past year. Two contacts attribute some of the recent 
weakness in seasonal merchandise to unseasonably 
mild weather. Despite the disappointing sales perfor-
mance, inventories were said to be at satisfactory levels. 
Retail contacts continued to express concern about the 
near term sales outlook, with one noting that a number of 
store closings are in the works across the District.  
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that sales of 
new vehicles were steady at a strong level in early 2017, 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
while sales of used vehicles picked up further.  Invento-
ries of new vehicles have come down but remain some-
what elevated.  Retail and wholesale credit conditions 
were reported to be in good shape.  
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) continued to climb in January, reaching its high-
est level in more than a decade.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has picked 
up sharply in early 2017, with new orders, unfilled or-
ders, and shipments rising noticeably. Manufacturing 
contacts also continued to express widespread optimism 
about the near-term outlook. Businesses in the whole-
sale trade and transportation industries reported more 
modest improvement but remain widely optimistic about 
future business conditions.   
Services 
Service-sector businesses continued to report mixed but, 
on balance, steady business conditions in early 2017. 
Contacts in both the finance and health & education 
sectors noted a pickup in activity, while those in leisure 
and hospitality and information sectors reported some 
softening. Looking ahead, service-sector businesses 
remained generally optimistic about the outlook—
particularly those in the professional & business services 
industry. Tourism activity has shown signs of continued 
softening, with Broadway theaters reporting sharp de-
clines in attendance in January and especially February, 
and hotels generally reporting lower occupancy rates.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets have been mixed across the District 
since the last report, with the high end of the market 
continuing to lag. New York City’s rental market has 
weakened further. Rents on larger apartments have 
continued to decline, while rents on smaller units have 
been flat; moreover, landlords have been offering more 
generous concessions in early 2017. Apartment rents 
have been flat in the areas around New York City but 
have continued to edge up across upstate New York. 
Rental vacancy rates have edged down in New York 
City, reportedly due, in part, to the increased conces-
sions. Across the District overall, vacancy rates have 
been mostly steady.   
New York City’s co-op and condo resale market has 
been flat in early 2017. There was a pickup in activity in 
January, but that has subsided in the first half of Febru-
ary. Prices on larger units—especially new develop-
ment—have continued to slip, while prices on smaller 
apartments have been steady to up slightly. The invento-
ry of newly developed units has continued to rise; the 
inventory of resale units has risen but remains excep-
tionally low. Bidding wars have largely subsided.  
Elsewhere across the District, market conditions have 
been more favorable. Home sales in the suburbs around 
New York City have been quite robust; prices have re-
mained flat in northern New Jersey and Westchester but 
have begun to pick up on Long Island. In upstate New 
York, the market has continued to strengthen, with brisk 
sales activity, rising prices, and extremely tight inventory.    
Commercial real estate markets have been steady to 
somewhat stronger in the first few weeks of 2017.  Office 
markets were little changed—both in and around New 
York City, as well as in upstate New York—and asking 
rents have mostly been stable. However, the market for 
industrial space has continued to strengthen. Across the 
New York City metro area, industrial vacancy rates have 
declined further and rents have continued to rise. In 
upstate New York, vacancy rates have been steady, 
while rents have moved up noticeably.   
New home construction—both single-family and multi-
family—has been sluggish across most of the District. 
New office construction has picked up somewhat but 
remains fairly subdued. However, there continues to be 
a good deal of office construction in progress in New 
York City. Industrial construction has been fairly strong.     
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium sized banks in the District reported 
weaker demand for consumer loans and residential 
mortgages, but no change in demand for commercial 
mortgages or C&I loans. Bankers reported that credit 
standards were unchanged across all loan categories. 
Spreads of loan rates over cost of funds were un-
changed across all loan categories except residential 
mortgages, for which bankers reported widening 
spreads. Respondents also reported an increase in the 
average deposit rate. Finally, bankers reported higher 
delinquency rates across all loan categories except 
commercial mortgages, for which bankers reported no 
change in delinquency rates. ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace during the current Beige Book reporting 
period. Notable shifts in activity included manufacturing and homebuilding, which improved to a moderate pace of 
growth. Four sectors — nonauto consumer spending, lending, and nonresidential construction and leasing — were 
essentially unchanged, after growing at a modest pace in the prior period. Existing home sales appeared to have de-
clined. According to most contacts, employment, wages, and prices continued to grow at a modest pace. Expectations 
for firm growth have risen recently; however, the anticipated pace of growth over the next six months remains moderate 
on average.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment has continued at a modest pace of growth 
since the prior report. Manufacturing firms continued to 
note increases in employment and in the length of aver-
age hours worked. Employment indicators from nonman-
ufacturing firms remained positive overall, but with small-
er net increases as a growing percentage of firms report-
ed a decrease in full-time and part-time workers.  
Staffing firms described themselves as busy. In some 
cases, activity picked up immediately following the holi-
day lull and continued at a steady pace.  
Wage pressures continued to be modest with little shift in 
reporting on wage levels or labor market tightness. Staff-
ing contacts noted little change in overall wage pres-
sures. A somewhat lower percentage of nonmanufactur-
ing contacts reported wage increases than during the 
prior period.  
Prices  
On balance, price levels continued to rise modestly. 
About two-thirds of firm contacts reported no change at 
all in prices paid and prices received. Of the remaining 
firms, more reported increases than decreases with the 
exception of prices received by nonmanufacturing firms, 
which were almost evenly balanced. Contacts in banking 
and other large service-sector firms noted no signs, nor 
fear of inflation. Homebuilders continued to note the 
greatest price pressures for their inputs, especially for 
subcontracted labor. Overall, the sales prices of existing 
homes decreased slightly, if at all, although this varies 
across markets and price categories.  
Looking ahead one year, manufacturers anticipate a 2.0 
percent increase in prices received for their own goods 
and services, and nonmanufacturers expect a 2.5 per-
cent increase. Manufacturers also reported expectations 
of 2.2 percent annual inflation for consumers — slightly 
higher than last fall, while nonmanufacturers continue to 
expect 2.0 percent inflation.  
Manufacturing 
A greater percentage of firm contacts in a broader range 
of sectors reported increased manufacturing activity than 
in the previous period, suggesting moderate growth 
overall. Contacts reported that new orders picked up to a 
moderate pace of growth, while shipments continued at 
a modest pace.  
Overall, gains in activity were indicated by most major 
sectors, including the makers of lumber products, paper 
products, chemicals, primary and fabricated metal prod-
ucts, industrial machinery, and electronic products.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
More than half of the manufacturing contacts were opti-
mistic that orders, shipments, and general activity would 
grow over the next six months, similar to the prior Beige 
Book period. About one-third of the contacts expressed 
expectations for increased capital expenditures, although 
this was a bit lower than the prior period.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail sales grew slightly at best during the 
period, according to several analysts. One area chain 
reported that sales were a little lower than the prior two 
months, and a bit below expectations but the contact 
was not yet worried about a changing trend.  
Auto dealers noted concern this period, as sales only 
slightly increased over last year after adjusting for much 
milder weather (sales were hurt last year by a significant 
January 2016 snowstorm). Dealers worry about too 
much inventory and getting squeezed between manufac-
turers’ ongoing supply and slightly slumping demand.  
Tourism contacts generally indicated a continuation of 
modest growth and positive prospects for the year 
ahead. A Poconos contact indicated that the snow sea-
son had opened early and that there was a good base of 
snow for Presidents’ Day, which coincides with the ar-
ea’s biggest winter week because so many schools have 
vacations. Meanwhile, area water parks continue to 
attract an increasing number of visitors year-round. 
Contacts at the Jersey Shore indicated that peak sum-
mer bookings are filling up earlier each year. Even casi-
no revenues in Atlantic City have finally begun to register 
some year-over-year gains on a more consistent basis.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Overall, Third District service-sector firms continued to 
report moderate growth in general activity; moreover, the 
pace was somewhat faster than the prior period. Specifi-
cally, contacts noted a pickup in the moderate pace of 
sales and new orders. A transportation analyst reported 
that truck freight was growing a bit better than the prior 
period, as its market tightened at year-end. Spot rates 
for hiring trucks had increased, so contract rates will 
likely follow, according to the analyst. Along with steady 
growth, one contact noted that the incidence of consum-
ers not paying their monthly bills continues to fall. Gener-
ally, the high expectations of future growth reported in 
the prior period were tempered this period — retreating 
to more average levels. 
 
 
Financial Services 
Third District financial firms reported little or no change in 
overall loan volumes, after posting modest increases 
during the prior Beige Book period. This excludes the 
typically large seasonal decrease observed in credit card 
volumes, which follows the annual holiday season.  
Consumer lending (other than for credit cards and autos) 
was the only loan category to grow significantly during 
the period. Commercial real estate loan volume grew a 
bit, but less so than the same period last year. Home 
equity loans and auto loans decreased slightly, while 
volumes of home mortgages and of commercial and 
industrial loans were mostly unchanged.  
Most contacts continued to note the increased optimism 
of Wall Street investors and larger Main Street business-
es but also noted increased uncertainty, especially for 
consumers and small businesses. In general, banking 
contacts continued to express cautious optimism for 
slow, steady growth.  
Real Estate and Construction 
On balance, homebuilders were pleased to report that 
the new year began with moderate increases in traffic, 
contract signings, and construction backlogs. Mild winter 
weather helped year-over-year comparisons, but activity 
has also outperformed firms’ expectations.  
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
reported a modest decline in existing home sales follow-
ing moderate growth last period. They report no signs 
yet that the very low inventory levels will be replenished 
in time to boost sales this spring.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts covering much of the 
Third District reported little change overall to the relative-
ly high levels of construction and leasing activity. Con-
tacts reported strong growth for projects associated with 
energy and pipelines and some ongoing growth for the 
office market in and around Philadelphia. However, 
contacts have begun to voice concerns as to whether the 
industrial/warehouse market might be near a peak, as 
they have previously said for multifamily construction. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity grew moderately on balance across the Fourth District during the current reporting period. Labor 
markets continued to show signs of tightening, with moderate wage gains. Upward pressure on prices paid and prices 
received dampened slightly. Consumers continued to favor Internet and mobile shopping over brick and mortar. Motor 
vehicle sales spiked higher in January. Production picked up at manufacturing plants. Nonfinancial services firms expe-
rienced slight revenue growth overall, but demand was strong for IT and data analytics services. The housing market 
improved, with higher unit sales and higher prices. Commercial builders believe 2017 will be a solid year for their indus-
try, though some expect that 2017 will also be the peak of the current construction cycle. Lending pipelines remain 
relatively strong. 
Employment and Wages  
Reports indicated continued tightening in labor markets. 
Staffing increases were prevalent in the nonfinancial 
services and the real estate and construction industries. 
Manufacturing saw a pickup in hiring after reporting flat 
or lower payrolls since late last summer. Attracting and 
retaining qualified employees in the skilled trades and 
technical positions such as engineering and data analyt-
ics remain challenging and are fueling wage and benefit 
increases across industry sectors. One large manufac-
turer noted that the average time required to fill skilled 
production or professional job openings has risen from 
two months to six months. Reports of average wage 
increases during 2017 are generally expected to fall 
within the 2 percent to 3 percent range, but there were a 
few reports of 3 percent to 5 percent increases.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on prices paid and prices received has 
dampened over the period. Several nonfinancial services 
providers reported that they are holding their billing rates 
in check, excluding inflation adjustments, because of 
pushback from clients when they attempted to raise 
rates. Similarly, suppliers of healthcare products sold to 
hospitals indicated that they are holding their prices in 
check until potential changes in the Affordable Care Act 
are clearer. A data analytics firm reported that brick-and-
mortar retailers generally are experiencing 1.5 percent to 
3 percent price declines. One factor driving the declines 
is competition from their Internet counterparts. An auto 
dealer noted that the average transaction price is ap-
proaching a historic high mainly because of the populari-
ty of light trucks, which have higher sticker prices than 
cars. He believes that rising interest rates will help tem-
per further sticker price increases. Manufacturers are 
seeing modest increases in raw material prices, which 
they attributed to the rising cost of steel products and 
suppliers finally raising prices after having delayed such 
increases during the past few years. Wellhead prices for 
natural gas continue to trend slowly higher, but they 
remain below the threshold that would significantly boost 
upstream activity. 
Consumer Spending 
Reports indicated that Internet retailers are experiencing 
strong revenue growth, while same-store sales were flat. 
Although traditional brick-and-mortar retailers are invest-
ing in ecommerce, their combined sales have increased 
at a slower pace than the sales of Internet specialists. 
That said, a furniture chain reported a significant boost in 
post-election consumer confidence, which when com-
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
bined with low interest rates contributed to fourth quarter 
revenues at a historic high. Strong sales continued into 
January. Similarly, car dealers reported a spike in unit 
sales of new and used vehicles during January when 
compared to those of the same time period a year earlier 
and when compared to December’s transactions. One 
dealer attributed the increase in sales to an ongoing post 
election boost in consumer confidence and to rising 
OEM incentives. Unit sales increases are reportedly 
around 12 percent, with light trucks dominating sales.  
Manufacturing 
Factory output picked up slightly since our last report. 
Activity for suppliers to the aerospace, construction, and 
motor vehicle industries remains elevated. Manufactur-
ers of food service and warehouse automation equip-
ment cited strong growth during 2016. Factors tempering 
output growth for other manufacturing industries include 
ongoing weakness in the oil and gas industry and the 
strong dollar. The auto industry is concerned about the 
possible impacts of a border-adjustment tax. Auto parts 
cross borders multiple times prior to final assembly. A 
border tax policy would likely result in higher sticker 
prices and an increase in OEM incentives. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector grew slightly 
over the period. Strongest demand was seen in the IT 
and data analytics, commercial real estate services, and 
management consulting segments. Several contacts 
observed that clients were in a wait-and-see mode prior 
to the presidential election and that demand for services 
picked up post election. An engineering design firm 
reported that through much of 2016, clients had been 
hesitant to move forward with projects, especially large 
projects. That said, there was a noticeable pickup in 
project feasibility studies since the presidential election. 
Similarly, a law partner noted that demand for legal 
services was stable through most of 2016. However, in 
the fourth quarter, his firm saw a broad-based uptick in 
demand. A landscape architecture firm reported a large 
spike in RFPs during December, especially for nontradi-
tional services. The firm indicated that many of these 
projects had been postponed for years and that property 
owners are now feeling confident about the economy.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Unit sales of new and existing single-family homes for all 
of 2016 increased almost 7 percent compared to those 
of a year earlier. The average sales price rose 4.5 per-
cent. Realtors reported that rising consumer confidence 
and the likelihood of higher interest rates are factors 
motivating buying decisions. Low inventory of existing 
homes for sale is helping boost prices. Estimates of 
single-family construction starts for 2016 were higher in 
Ohio and eastern Kentucky, compared to those of a year 
earlier. 
Overall activity in the commercial construction market 
remains elevated. Contacts expect that 2017 will be a 
solid year for their industry, though some noted that 2017 
may be the peak of the current construction cycle and 
that they anticipate uncertainty surrounding business 
activity in 2018. General contractors are seeing strong 
demand from healthcare and industrial customers. The 
latter group’s demand is especially pronounced for ware-
housing and distribution facilities. An Internet retailer 
announced plans to construct a major hub in the District. 
A commercial real estate services contact noted a large 
post election spike in commercial property transaction 
fees after business had been flat for most of 2016. Gen-
eral contractors cited two issues that may be dampening 
multifamily construction: First, uncertainty about the 
administration’s tax policies is causing worry among 
sellers of affordable housing tax credits. Even though no 
new tax policies are in place, firms are holding off on 
purchasing tax credits because of speculation that they 
won’t need to offset their taxes as much as in the past. 
Second, banks are moving more cautiously when con-
sidering financing multifamily developments out of con-
cern that some hotter markets may be overbuilt. As a 
result, developers are being required to hold equity 
positions that are about 10 percentage points higher 
compared to requirements of a couple of years ago.   
Financial Services 
Bankers reported that lending pipelines remain relatively 
strong. The outlook is more positive since the presiden-
tial election because of an increase in consumer and 
business confidence that bankers believe will fuel in-
creased demand for their products and services. Howev-
er, the boost in demand may not occur until after mid-
year 2017. In contrast, potential changes in US trade 
policies could restrain the business activities of corporate 
clients with large global business models. Another re-
ported concern is that non amortizing loans issued to 
commercial developers prior to the financial crisis are 
coming due. Already there are some developers turning 
over collateral rather than repaying loans because many 
retail properties are worth less than the loan value. ■  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Fifth District grew moderately since the previous Beige Book report. Labor demand continued to 
increase and there were more reports of employees being converted from temporary to permanent workers. Prices rose 
somewhat more rapidly at services firms, while increases in manufacturing prices received were modest. Manufacturing 
input price growth moderated slightly. Manufacturing strengthened, and producers anticipated continued improvement 
during 2017. Retail sales rose on balance. Tourism grew at a normal seasonal pace. Residential real estate activity 
increased slightly, while commercial leasing rose moderately. In banking and finance, commercial loan demand rose 
and residential mortgage demand softened to typical seasonal levels. At non-financial services firms, revenues contin-
ued to rise at a modest pace. Energy markets strengthened modestly and agricultural conditions were largely un-
changed at seasonal levels. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand remained moderate, although hiring 
increased at a slightly slower pace since the previous 
Beige Book because of usual seasonal slowing at the 
beginning of the year. District contacts reported modest 
increases in wages in recent weeks. Recruiters contin-
ued to report tight labor markets, with strong demand, 
particularly for higher-level skilled workers. Staffing firms 
reported that the volume of worker conversion from 
temporary to permanent increased modestly. Tourism 
and hotel contacts were planning typical levels of sea-
sonal hiring but were experiencing shortages of appli-
cants; some businesses were offering higher wages or 
incentives to fill those positions.  
Prices  
Services firms’ prices rose at a moderately faster pace in 
recent weeks while retail prices grew more robustly, 
according to our most recent surveys. Manufacturers 
reported modest growth in prices received and a slight 
slowdown in average input price growth. Home prices 
inched up, on balance. Residential home builders report-
ed a modest increase in lot prices in some areas. Grain, 
livestock, and poultry prices rose marginally but re-
mained below historical averages. Beef prices, however, 
continued to decline slightly. Coal prices remained at the 
slightly elevated levels previously reported, while natural 
gas prices edged lower in recent weeks. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported increased shipments, along with 
stronger growth in new orders and greater capacity 
utilization since the prior Beige Book. Food producers 
and metals fabricators were among those indicating 
greater strength. A steel producer reported double-digit 
growth in quotes. Additionally, an executive from a paper 
products company said demand had increased for pulp 
and specialty products. A producer of aerospace prod-
ucts expected his output to double in 2017. Surveyed 
manufacturers anticipated stronger business conditions 
during the next six months.  
Ports and Transportation 
Port officials reported record strength in container vol-
ume since the previous Beige Book. At one port, volume 
was described as “off the charts,” and another had its 
best month ever for loaded containers. Imports of furni-
ture, building supplies, and auto parts were strong. Auto 
imports remained at high levels, but exports of used cars 
to oil producing regions softened, which was attributed to 
falling oil prices in those destinations. Exports of con-
struction and agricultural equipment remained weak. 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Executives at trucking firms in the District said that de-
mand for freight hauling services was somewhat softer in 
recent weeks, but one contact noted that expectations 
were for an improvement in the second half of the year. 
A railroad industry source commented that capacity had 
begun to tighten in freight transportation.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales rose on balance, particularly for building 
supply and home and garden establishments, as well as 
hardware stores. In contrast, sales at convenience and 
grocery stores were lower. Auto sales remained strong. 
Low fuel prices continued to spur sales of pick-up trucks 
and reduce demand for compact cars. A large auto 
dealer said that unit sales were down but gross profit per 
unit was up.  
Tourism grew at a normal seasonal pace in recent 
weeks. A Virginia ski resort reported strong weekend 
bookings and few cancellations, even during warm 
weather, because of available alternate activities. A 
contact on the outer banks of North Carolina said tour-
ism was little changed at usual off-season levels. Ac-
cording to sources at coastal locations, advance book-
ings were at typical levels for this time of year. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased modestly since 
the previous report. Contacts reported good levels of 
buyer traffic in recent weeks; however some sources 
said snow storms reduced buyer traffic in affected areas. 
Brokers reported that inventories generally remained at 
low levels, although a few contacts noted slight increas-
es for some price ranges. Nonetheless, new listings sold 
quickly. Residential builders reported that home starts 
and closings increased to moderate levels. 
Commercial leasing increased moderately in recent 
weeks and was stronger than a year ago according to 
contacts. Rents rose moderately while vacancy rates 
edged down. Real estate agents said that industrial and 
retail leasing remained robust, and available space was 
limited. Meanwhile, office leasing increased modestly. 
Overall, commercial construction remained steady at 
modest levels, although a large general contractor re-
ported the largest backlog in his firm’s history. Multi-
family and mixed used developments continued to domi-
nate new commercial construction projects.  
 
 
 
Banking and Finance 
Since our previous beige book, loan demand grew mod-
erately. Overall, bankers said that consumer and com-
mercial demand was increasing at a healthy rate with the 
exception of some small rural areas throughout the 
District and in coal regions of West Virginia. In the Dis-
trict on the whole, residential mortgage demand softened 
slightly to a typical seasonal level. Commercial loan 
demand grew at a moderately faster pace. Demand for 
small business loans and lines of credit continued to rise 
at a modest pace. Credit quality was unchanged on 
balance but varied by region; a West Virginia banker 
said credit quality remained at an acceptable level while 
a South Carolina lender said quality was at an all-time 
high. Interest rates rose slightly in recent weeks. A lend-
er in Virginia noted a sense of urgency from business to 
borrow before interest rates increase further. Competi-
tion among banks remained fierce. The trend in mergers 
and acquisitions continued. Bankers expressed optimism 
that regulatory changes under the new administration 
would be more favorable.  
Non-Financial Services 
Revenues at services firms increased at a modest pace. 
Entertainment venues, accountant services, and trades 
associated with home-building reported increases. 
Healthcare organizations reported robust demand since 
the previous Beige Book. An executive at a large 
healthcare organization said capital projects were being 
considered to handle the growth. One hospital reported 
the opening of many new physician practices associated 
with the facility.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Energy markets strengthened modestly in recent weeks. 
Coal production picked up marginally as the pricing and 
regulatory environment improved for them. Natural gas 
production was unchanged. A utility executive in Mary-
land reported a modest increase in energy demand from 
commercial customers but a slight decline in residential 
connections. Agriculture conditions were largely un-
changed at typical seasonal levels. Demand for poultry 
rose moderately. Some expansions were reported at 
poultry farms in North Carolina. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business contacts indicated that economic activity in the Sixth District continued to expand, albeit modestly, from the 
previous report. The outlook among contacts for the next three to six months remains positive. 
The labor market remained tight and wage pressures were mostly subdued. Overall, non-labor input costs remained 
modest. Retailers cited steady sales since the previous report. Automobile dealers indicated sales were better than 
expected. Tourism activity improved. Residential real estate builders indicated that construction activity was up, and 
new home sales and inventory levels were flat to slightly up compared with a year ago. Residential real estate brokers 
reported that existing home sales increased and inventory levels were down from a year earlier. Home prices continued 
to modestly improve. Demand for commercial real estate continued to improve and commercial construction activity 
increased. Manufacturers noted increases in new orders and production. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts reported ongoing tightening in the labor market 
since the previous report. Firms continued to struggle 
finding workers across various fields and skill levels. 
Firms continued to note growing partnerships with area 
workforce development organizations, community colleg-
es, and universities to develop customized training pro-
grams to help develop larger pipelines of talent. Addition-
ally, many firms continued to increase investment in 
internal training programs to develop existing personnel, 
rather than seek qualified labor across a limited pool of 
external candidates. Turnover picked up in banking and 
finance, manufacturing, and construction, where some 
industry contacts indicated they had to evaluate and 
adjust compensation structures, such as, increasing 
bonuses and incentive pay, to retain high-quality work-
ers. There were scattered reports of plans to increase 
employee headcounts over the next 12 months, though 
overall, contacts indicated that they intend to keep em-
ployment levels steady. Wage growth continued to be 
evident in select geographic locations and particular 
occupations.   
Prices  
Most contacts reported modest non-labor input cost 
pressures, except for manufacturing purchasing manag-
ers who noted greater increases in commodity prices. 
According to the Atlanta Fed's survey of business infla-
tion expectations, year-over-year unit costs were up 1.7 
percent in February. The survey respondents indicated 
they expect unit costs to rise 2.0 percent over the next 
12 months.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
On balance, District retailers reported that sales levels 
grew at a steady pace since the last report. Merchants 
noted that on-line sales levels continued to rise, while 
brick and mortar sales remained sluggish. Automotive 
dealers reported stronger-than-expected sales in De-
cember. 
Hospitality contacts across the District reported growth in 
business, leisure, and group travel since the last report. 
Georgia contacts stated that business travel and conven-
tion bookings continued to be strong. The total number 
of visitors to the state of Florida increased over the re-
porting period, however, there continued to be a slow-
down in the number of international visitors. Louisiana 
reported increases in hotel occupancies, average daily 
rates, and revenue per available rooms since the last 
report. The outlook remains optimistic with healthy ad-
vanced bookings through the first quarter of this year.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from District residential real estate contacts 
continued to indicate slow but steady growth in January. 
Most builders noted that construction activity was up 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
from the year-ago level. Builders continued to indicate 
that home sales were flat to slightly up relative to the 
year-earlier level, while brokers reported an increase in 
home sales over the same period. The majority of build-
ers and brokers noted that buyer traffic was equal to or 
higher than the previous year’s level in January. Brokers 
reported that inventory levels were down relative to a 
year ago, while most builders indicated that inventory 
levels were flat or rising. Builders and brokers continued 
to note modest gains in home prices. Home sales expec-
tations improved in January, with most brokers and 
builders anticipating sales to increase slightly over the 
next three months relative to the year-earlier level. Most 
builders anticipate construction activity will hold steady at 
the current pace or increase slightly over the next three 
months. 
Most commercial real estate contacts noted improve-
ments in demand, resulting in rent growth and increased 
absorption, but continued to caution that the rate of 
improvement varied by metropolitan area, submarket, 
and property type. Many commercial contractors indicat-
ed that the pace of nonresidential construction activity 
had increased from a year ago, with many reporting 
backlogs greater than one year. Reports on the pace of 
multifamily construction continued to be mixed, with 
roughly half indicating that the pace had increased from 
the year-earlier level and the rest suggesting that the 
pace had leveled off or slowed. Looking forward, the 
majority of District commercial real estate contacts ex-
pect the pace of nonresidential and multifamily construc-
tion activity to increase slightly over the next quarter.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing contacts indicated that overall 
business activity expanded since the last report. New 
orders and production levels continued to increase. 
Supply delivery times were slightly longer, while finished 
inventory levels fell. Expectations for future production 
rose with nearly two-thirds of firms expecting higher 
production levels over the next six months.  
Transportation 
Transportation activity in the District was relatively un-
changed since the last report. District ports cited contin-
ued growth in shipments of containers, autos, and ma-
chinery. Trucking freight volumes declined further since 
the previous report, and carriers indicated they are work-
ing to reduce capacity to improve pricing. Rail contacts, 
however, reported that total traffic was flat compared 
with year-earlier levels following several months of de-
clines. Intermodal traffic was down slightly.  
 
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers. However, some small and medium-sized busi-
nesses continued to have difficulty obtaining credit. 
Some contacts noted that development projects were 
being funded by hedge funds and private equity sources, 
rather than banks.  
Energy  
Reports from District energy contacts indicated that 
liquefied natural gas exports from the Gulf Coast region 
increased. Refinery contacts reported that interstate 
pipeline reversals have eased some of the transportation 
costs for moving oil and gas to Gulf Coast refiners. Con-
tacts noted crude oil inventories remain at historically 
high levels. Utility industry contacts continued to upgrade 
power generation plants to natural gas, and there has 
been continued activity to expand wind generation   
power.   
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. By 
early February, rain brought some improvement to 
drought conditions. However, much of the District contin-
ued to experience varying degrees of drought with small 
areas of north central Alabama and northeastern Geor-
gia categorized in extreme drought. Florida's February 
orange forecast was down from January, remaining 
below last season's production. On a year-over-year 
basis, prices paid to farmers in December were up for 
cotton, soybeans, and broilers, but down for corn, rice, 
beef, and eggs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District picked up to a moderate pace in January and early February, and 
contacts expected activity to continue rising at a moderate pace over the next six to twelve months. Employment, wag-
es, business spending, and manufacturing production all grew at moderate rates, consumer spending increased mod-
estly, and construction and real estate activity rose slightly. Financial conditions were little changed, prices increased 
modestly, and farm incomes improved slightly. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth picked up to a moderate rate over 
the reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue 
to rise at a moderate rate over the next six to twelve 
months. Contacts continued to indicate that the labor 
market is tight and that they are experiencing difficulty 
filling positions at all skill levels. A staffing firm again 
reported little change in billable hours and ongoing diffi-
culty filling orders at the wages employers were willing to 
pay. Wage growth remained at a moderate pace. Some 
contacts noted larger wage increases for high-skilled 
occupations, while a number indicated that they raised 
wages nearly equally for all employees. Many contacts 
also reported rising healthcare costs. 
Prices  
Overall, prices rose modestly in January and early Feb-
ruary. Despite reports of heavy promotional activity, retail 
prices generally increased modestly. Most metals prices 
rose again, and an increasing number of firms reported 
that rising materials costs were leading them to increase 
their prices. 
 
 
 
Consumer Spending 
Growth in consumer spending remained modest over the 
reporting period, with sales results weaker than ex-
pected. Contacts reported stronger sales in the food and 
beverage, health and personal care, and general mer-
chandise sectors and weaker sales in the apparel, gro-
cery, and e-commerce sectors. Light vehicle sales 
slowed somewhat, but the pace was still strong and 
incentives remained aggressive. Used vehicle sales held 
steady. 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending continued at a moderate 
pace in January and early February. Most retailers indi-
cated that inventories were at comfortable levels. Manu-
facturing inventories were also at desired levels overall, 
though steel service center inventories were very low. 
Capital expenditures grew at a moderate pace, and 
contacts expected that pace to continue over the next six 
to twelve months. Outlays were primarily for replacing 
industrial and IT equipment, though there was an in-
crease in the number of firms reporting spending for 
expansion. 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly on 
balance over the reporting period. Residential building 
increased slightly, with growth concentrated in the single
-family segment and in urban locations. Home sales 
increased modestly, while home prices increased slight-
ly. Demand for nonresidential construction edged up, 
with growth concentrated in the industrial and infrastruc-
ture sectors. The pace of commercial real estate activity 
continued to be robust and even quickened some, with 
growth in both the for-sale and for-lease segments. One 
contact noted that banks continue to be conservative 
about lending in the sector. Commercial rents, availabil-
ity of sublease space, and commercial vacancy rates 
were little changed. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production again grew at a moderate 
pace in January and early February. Growth was wide-
spread across sectors, and even picked up for some 
long-struggling sectors. Specialty metals manufacturers 
reported increased shipments and steady growth in 
order books. Demand for steel remained modest, but 
there were early signs of a pickup as steel service cen-
ters began to replenish low inventories. Heavy machin-
ery manufacturers reported an increase in sales overall, 
with slow but steady improvements in construction de-
mand outweighing weak agricultural demand. Manufac-
turers of construction materials also reported slow in-
creases in shipments, in line with the modest pace of 
improvement in construction. Activity in the autos and 
aerospace sectors slowed some but remained at a high 
level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Market participants again reported 
steady growth in equity prices and low volatility. Loan 
volumes to middle-market businesses increased slightly, 
which contacts attributed to refinancing in anticipation of 
higher interest rates rather than an increase in underly-
ing demand. Contacts reported low delinquency rates, 
with the exception of the energy and agriculture sectors. 
Consumer loan demand was little changed overall, 
though one contact reported an increase in auto loans. 
An auto dealer also expressed concerns that standards 
were loosening further for sub-prime auto financing. 
Credit card volume was steady and delinquencies were 
up a bit. 
 
Agriculture 
Prospects for farm income in 2017 improved slightly in 
January and early February, although the agricultural 
sector continued to operate under stress. Futures prices 
moved up enough so that – given expected costs – 
some corn and most soybean operations could lock in 
small profits for 2017. With profit margins looking to be 
higher for soybeans than for corn, contacts expected a 
shift in the mix of planting this year, with one reporting an 
attendant pickup in sales of soybean seeds. Cattle, 
dairy, and hog operations all benefitted from price in-
creases . ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have continued to expand at a modest pace since our previous report. General retail sales growth 
was modest, while manufacturing activity showed signs of strengthening. Conversely, reports from auto dealers indicat-
ed a slight decline in first-quarter sales.  Business contacts surveyed in mid-February continued to hold an optimistic 
outlook for growth in 2017.  On net, 57 percent of contacts expect District economic conditions in 2017 to be better or 
somewhat better than last year. This was a slight improvement since contacts were surveyed in mid-November. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased modestly since the previous 
report. On net, 25 percent of business contacts surveyed 
in mid-February reported that first-quarter employment 
was higher or slightly higher than a year ago; 18 percent 
reported hours worked were higher or slightly higher. 
District contacts continue to report that the labor market 
remains tight. Manufacturing, real estate, and construc-
tion contacts in St. Louis reported difficulties finding 
qualified candidates, and contacts in Memphis and Lou-
isville reported an inability to fill key positions. 
Contacts reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report. On net, 63 percent of contacts reported 
wages were slightly higher or higher than a year ago. 
Contacts in Little Rock reported that wages for skilled 
workers continue to increase slowly, with more employ-
ees changing employers for higher wages. Contacts in 
Memphis and Louisville reported upward pressure on 
wages for both skilled and unskilled positions. 
Prices  
Price pressures have increased modestly since our 
previous report. A greater share of business contacts 
surveyed reported higher prices charged to consumers 
than in previous surveys. On net, 33 percent of contacts 
reported prices were slightly higher than a year ago and 
a similar share expect price increases during the second 
quarter. On net, 44 percent reported non-labor input 
costs were slightly higher or higher.  
A contact in the Louisville manufacturing sector reported 
their raw material input costs were slightly higher due to 
supply shortages of certain chemicals needed higher in 
their supply chain. Since the previous report, cash prices 
of rice and corn have declined slightly, while the prices of 
sorghum and soybeans were slightly higher and coal 
prices were modestly higher. House prices across the 
District also increased moderately. A residential real 
estate contact in the St. Louis area reported raw material 
prices have climbed. 
Consumer Spending  
General retail sales growth has been modest since our 
previous report and contacts continued to hold an opti-
mistic outlook for 2017. Most general retailers reported a 
slight increase in year-over-year sales halfway through 
the first quarter. Similarly, the majority of hospitality 
contacts in St. Louis, Memphis, and Little Rock indicated 
that sales during this period met expectations and that 
they anticipate sustained growth in the months to come. 
On the other hand, a hospitality contact in Louisville 
reported that occupancy rates are projected to decrease 
this year after a strong 2016. Reports from auto dealers 
indicate a slight decline in year-over-year sales in the 
first quarter. Half of surveyed auto dealers reported a 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
shift in demand toward used vehicles, and the remaining 
dealers reported no change. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased at a moderate pace 
since our previous report. Several companies reported 
capital expenditure and facility expansion plans in the 
District, including motor vehicle, food product, and wood 
product manufacturers. In a recent survey, contacts 
reported an improvement in manufacturing conditions. A 
strong majority reported that production, new orders, and 
capacity utilization increased in the first quarter relative 
to one year ago. This is an improvement from our previ-
ous survey, when most contacts reported no change in 
activity from one year earlier. Contacts were also opti-
mistic about the second quarter, with three-fourths ex-
pecting further growth in production, new orders, and 
capacity utilization. Despite the optimistic outlook, some 
contacts expressed concerns about labor shortages and 
possible trade restrictions. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Responses from the service sector have been positive 
since the previous report. In particular, several firms that 
provide information technology services, leisure and 
hospitality services, and healthcare announced plans to 
build new or expand current facilities and hire new em-
ployees. Reports from the transportation sector were 
positive, with two large employers hiring new employees 
and renovating facilities. Reports from the professional 
business services and warehousing sectors were 
mixed—some existing employers reduced employment 
while new companies began hiring. About two-thirds of 
service and transportation contacts reported sales met or 
exceeded expectations in the current quarter, and two-
thirds of contacts expect dollar sales to be higher in the 
second quarter than at the same time last year. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has improved slightly 
since our previous report. Real estate contacts reported 
mixed home sales activity, indicating little change in 
overall sales. Nearly half of respondents indicated that 
sales fell short of expectations midway through the first 
quarter, citing reasons such as low inventory levels and 
higher mortgage rates. Still, many real estate contacts 
expect demand to improve in the second quarter, push-
ing single-family sales above one year ago. Residential 
construction activity has improved slightly since the 
previous report. December construction starts ticked up, 
while there was a minor decrease in permit activity. A 
slim majority of local real estate contacts reported that 
residential construction activity was slightly higher than a 
year ago halfway through the first quarter, and a similar 
fraction of respondents expect construction to continue 
to increase into the second quarter. 
Commercial real estate activity has improved at a mod-
erate pace since the previous report. A majority of re-
spondents indicated an increase in demand for both 
office and industrial properties compared with the same 
time last year. Meanwhile, most contacts reported no 
change in demand for retail and multifamily properties. 
These trends are expected to continue in the coming 
months. Commercial construction activity improved 
modestly. Local construction contacts continued to report 
a rise in demand for office and retail properties.  
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have improved at a 
moderate pace since the previous report. Banking con-
tacts report moderate to robust year-over-year growth in 
demand for business and mortgage loans. District bank-
ers also indicate that the credit quality of applicants for 
these two loan categories was markedly higher during 
the relevant period compared with last year. Since the 
previous report, there has been an uptick in the number 
of bankers reporting deteriorating credit quality among 
agricultural loan applicants. Nevertheless, contacts 
indicate that delinquency rates were slightly improved 
across all loan categories. The overall outlook among 
banking contacts is positive, with contacts citing expecta-
tions of modestly higher loan demand and the possibility 
of regulatory relief reducing compliance costs.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agriculture conditions were unchanged from the previous 
report. As of the end of January, more than 94 percent of 
District winter wheat was rated fair or better, a slight 
improvement over crop condition at the end of January 
2016 and the current crop’s condition at the end of De-
cember. However, contacts reported that lower grain 
prices continued to affect farmers in the area, who have 
further reduced investment in land and equipment. 
Natural resource extraction conditions improved slightly 
from the previous report, with coal production stabilizing 
and higher coal prices helping profits. District seasonally-
adjusted coal production was little changed from Decem-
ber to January, while production was 10 percent above 
last year’s level. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew moderately, accompanied by 
moderate wage and price pressures. The District economy showed growth in manufacturing, residential construction, 
energy, and mining. But real estate and consumer spending were mixed, commercial construction slowed, and agricul-
ture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report. Ad 
hoc employer surveys in a Minneapolis-St. Paul suburb 
and in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula found that more than 
one-quarter were adding headcount, while only 5 percent 
were cutting jobs. A monthly manufacturing index 
showed strong increases in hiring expectations in 
December and January for Minnesota and the Dakotas. 
Initial unemployment insurance (UI) claims in January 
were about one-fourth lower compared with a year 
earlier. A staffing agency in southern Minnesota said that 
client calls and overall business were increasing, and 
another in Minneapolis-St. Paul said job orders were flat 
in January, but clients expected activity to pick up. Job 
fairs were held by a frac sand mine in western Wisconsin 
and oil companies in the Bakken oil patch; a builders’ 
group in Minnesota held a job fair to fill 200 openings. 
However, January online job openings in North Dakota 
continued to decline compared to previous-month and 
previous-year levels. Major upheavals continued in retail, 
where national outlets have seen significant layoffs in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, Fargo, N.D., Sioux Falls, S.D., and 
elsewhere. A South Dakota manufacturer announced 
“substantial” but unspecified layoffs, and the closure of 
an engineering facility in Minneapolis-St. Paul will affect 
up to 72 workers.   
 
Wage pressure was moderate to strong since the last 
report. A Minnesota state official noted that wages grew 
4 percent in 2016, and manufacturing paychecks rose by 
even more. Ad hoc surveys of employers in two regions 
suggested that average wages in these locations grew 
about 3 percent in 2016. Their wage expectations for 
2017 were slightly lower; however, given tight labor 
conditions, a lower wage outlook for 2017 might stem 
from historical expectations of long-standing wage 
stagnation. The owner of a southern Minnesota staffing 
agency expected manufacturing wages in the region to 
grow 8 percent to 10 percent in the coming year. 
“There’s a huge demand and low supply. Wages need to 
match in order to supply workforce.”    
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate since the last report. 
Sources in the construction sector noted that mounting 
labor and materials input prices were driving up 
construction costs. An industry report indicated that 
Minneapolis-St. Paul construction prices were expected 
to increase 3 percent in 2017, a faster pace than in 
2016. A utility was increasing gas and electric rates. 
Most prices received by farmers decreased in December 
from a year earlier, with the exception of soybeans, milk, 
chickens, and hogs. 
  
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending across the District was mixed since 
the last report. A Minnesota-based retailer reported 
weaker sales due to a continuing shift toward online 
shopping. Two large national retailers and two 
nationwide clothing retailers closed their doors in the 
Twin Cities market due to poor sales. However, analysts 
report reason for optimism in the Twin Cities retail sector 
overall. In Sioux Falls, S.D., retailers saw a slight uptick 
in spending, “but not by much,” a retailer commented. A 
mall manager in Montana reported that the mall was 
expanding by 40,000 square feet, effectively doubling 
the size of a mid-priced department store, while also 
refurbishing the mall with updates and new amenities. 
Reports from grocers were mixed; for instance, 
Minnesota was seeing the entrance of new grocers, 
while a large grocery retailer posted a loss in earnings 
since the last report. A North Dakota-based construction 
and farm equipment dealership announced the closure 
of eight stores in the Dakotas and Minnesota. 
Tourism 
Tourism conditions were mixed. Snow conditions in the 
northernmost regions of the Ninth District provided 
steady recreational tourism activity, according to industry 
officials. Regions to the south saw a decline in 
recreational activity since the last report due to poor 
snow conditions. Elsewhere, casino-related revenues in 
Deadwood, S.D., suffered a significant decline—as much 
as 25 percent at some operators—leaving one industry 
spokesperson to comment that the drop was “alarming.” 
At the same time, a large gaming firm was expanding 
and improving its resort in South Dakota, stating 
confidence in the local industry and an interest in 
catering to changing consumer tastes.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction activity was mixed since the last report. 
Commercial construction slowed. Projects out for bid in 
early January were below levels of a year ago but 
subsequently increased and by early February were on 
par with last year, according to an industry database. 
January commercial permitting was lower compared with 
a year earlier in most District metros. However, sources 
were optimistic about near-term activity, especially in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, where major projects were waiting 
to break ground. In Montana, $144 million in previously 
suspended road construction projects moved forward. In 
North Dakota, preliminary work has begun on a $250 
million airport in Williston and a $2.1 billion flood 
diversion project in Fargo. Residential construction was 
strong. Permitted units in January for both single- and 
multi-family units were significantly higher than a year 
earlier in Minneapolis-St. Paul and Sioux Falls. 
Residential construction was also higher in Fargo, but 
lower in Billings, Mont., and Rochester, Minn. 
Commercial real estate remained healthy, with some 
softening. Vacancy rates in Minneapolis-St. Paul were 
low but have risen recently in the retail and office 
categories. Industrial vacancies there remained low, with 
significant new space either under construction or in 
development. Home sales in January were mixed from a 
year earlier. They were slightly higher in western 
Wisconsin and the Flathead, Mont., region, and flat in 
Sioux Falls and northern Wisconsin. Home sales were 
slightly lower in Minneapolis-St. Paul, though it was the 
third-strongest January since 2005. Several sources 
attributed the softness to late-2016 sales, as consumers 
locked in rates before a mid-December rise in the Fed 
Funds rate.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions produced by Creighton University indicated 
increased activity in January compared to a month 
earlier in Minnesota and South Dakota; the index 
indicated decreased activity in North Dakota. Two 
contract equipment manufacturers reported an increase 
in orders in late 2016 and optimistic expectations for 
2017. A boat maker received a large contract to produce 
barges. A Minnesota candy maker opened a new 
production facility.   
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak since the 
previous report. Respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s 
most recent (January) survey of agricultural credit 
conditions indicated that farm incomes and capital 
spending fell in the fourth quarter of 2016 relative to a 
year earlier, with similar expectations for the coming 
three months. Activity in the energy and mining sectors 
increased since the last report. As of mid-February, oil 
and gas drilling in the Bakken region of North Dakota 
was up slightly from a month earlier. Federal regulators 
granted a license to a potential $1 billion project in 
Montana that would store energy from wind production 
and other sources. Production at operating District iron 
ore facilities was near full capacity, with an idled facility 
scheduled to resume production in coming months. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
District economic activity continued to expand modestly compared to the previous survey period, and contacts in most 
sectors expected additional gains in the months ahead. Consumer spending in January was modestly above year-ago 
levels, with retailers and auto dealers expecting stronger sales in the next few months. The manufacturing sector contin-
ued to expand moderately, and contacts in the professional, high-tech, transportation and wholesale trade sectors re-
ported increased sales. District real estate conditions were mixed as activity in the residential sector fell slightly and the 
commercial real estate sector expanded modestly. Energy activity increased moderately, and energy contacts remained 
optimistic, although some noted concerns about labor availability and increases in the costs of oilfield services. District 
farm income remained subdued, and agricultural credit conditions weakened modestly. Employment and employee 
hours edged up in January, and wages increased slightly. Prices rose slightly since the previous survey.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment and employee hours edged up in January. 
Respondents in the professional and high-tech services, 
real estate, health services and manufacturing sectors 
noted an increase in employment levels since the previ-
ous survey, while respondents in the transportation, 
restaurant, and tourism sectors noted a decline. Employ-
ment in the retail sector was higher than year-ago levels, 
and employment in the auto sector remained steady. 
Contacts across all sectors, except auto and tourism, 
expected an increase in employment in the coming 
months. Average employee hours picked up in both the 
manufacturing and service sectors since the previous 
survey period, and additional gains were expected in the 
next few months. Respondents noted a shortage of 
commercial drivers, salespeople, and service workers. 
Contacts in most sectors reported that the pace of wage 
growth slowed compared to the prior survey, but wages 
still rose slightly. In addition, moderate wage growth was 
anticipated in the coming months. 
Prices  
Overall, input prices rose slightly compared to the prior 
survey period, and contacts expected additional price 
increases in the months ahead. Respondents in the retail 
sector reported slightly higher input prices but held sell-
ing prices steady. Restaurant input prices were stable, 
while menu prices edged up. In the transportation sector, 
input prices rose moderately and selling prices increased 
modestly. Both input and selling prices were expected to 
grow moderately in the months ahead in the transporta-
tion sector. Construction prices rose slightly, and moder-
ate price increases were anticipated in the coming 
months. Manufacturers reported steady prices for fin-
ished goods, while raw material costs continued to edge 
up. Manufacturers anticipated slight increases in both 
finished goods and raw materials prices in the next few 
months. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly in January 
compared to year-ago levels, and respondents expected 
additional gains in the months ahead. Retail sales re-
mained above year-ago levels, despite being lower than 
the previous survey period. Several retailers noted an 
increase in sales for household appliances and sale 
items, while luxury and seasonal products sold poorly. 
Retailers anticipated sales to rise moderately in the next 
few months, and inventory levels were expected to in-
crease slightly. Auto sales decreased since the previous 
survey, but remained modestly above year-ago levels. 
Dealer contacts expected a solid pickup in sales in the 
months ahead. Auto inventories were mostly flat but 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
were expected to rise slightly. Restaurant sales in Janu-
ary were above year-ago levels, and contacts in the 
restaurant sector expected sales to remain relatively flat 
heading forward. District tourism activity was well above 
year-ago levels, but contacts expected a slight decline in 
activity heading into the spring months.  
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand moderately, 
and other business contacts reported increased sales. 
Manufacturers reported considerable improvement in 
durable goods production since the previous survey, 
particularly for metals, electronics, and machinery, while 
nondurable goods plants expanded at a modest pace. 
Production, shipments, and new orders all increased 
compared to the previous survey. Manufacturers’ capital 
spending plans expanded moderately, and firms’ expec-
tations for future activity were at their highest levels in 
over twelve years.   
Outside of manufacturing, contacts in the professional, 
high-tech, and transportation sectors reported moderate 
increases in sales, with strong gains anticipated in future 
months. Wholesale trade contacts noted a slight uptick in 
sales and expected activity to increase sharply heading 
forward. Professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade 
firms reported favorable capital spending plans, while 
transportation contacts expected capital spending to 
continue to fall. 
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity was mixed as residential real 
estate conditions deteriorated slightly while the commer-
cial real estate sector expanded modestly. Residential 
home sales declined slightly, and inventories moved 
moderately lower since the previous survey period. 
Contacts expected a moderate increase in sales during 
the spring months due to seasonal factors. Home prices 
increased strongly, and sales of low- and medium-priced 
homes outpaced sales of higher-priced homes. Housing 
starts declined, but construction supply sales increased. 
Respondents expected overall residential construction 
activity to increase in the months ahead. Activity across 
the commercial real estate sector expanded modestly in 
January and early February as vacancy rates declined 
and absorption, completions, construction underway, 
sales and prices increased. Contacts expected the com-
mercial real estate sector to expand further in the coming 
months.    
 
Banking 
Most bankers reported steady overall loan demand in 
January and early February. A majority of respondents 
indicated a steady demand for commercial and industri-
al, commercial real estate, residential real estate, agri-
cultural and consumer installment loans. Most bankers 
indicated loan quality was unchanged compared to a 
year ago. In addition, a majority of respondents expected 
loan quality to remain essentially the same over the next 
six months. Credit standards remained largely un-
changed in all major loan categories. Finally, a majority 
of respondents reported stable deposit levels.  
Energy 
Energy activity across the District increased moderately 
in January and early February, and the outlook remained 
optimistic. The number of active oil and gas drilling rigs 
continued to increase modestly, primarily in Oklahoma 
and New Mexico as activity focused on the Oklahoma 
SCOOP and STACK plays and the Permian Basin in 
New Mexico. Respondents expected global markets to 
balance by mid-year, and thus, projected oil prices to 
increase further throughout 2017. However, they re-
mained cautious given the rapid increase in domestic 
activity. Some respondents expressed concern about 
labor availability and increases in the costs of oilfield 
services. On the natural gas side, spot prices fell some-
what in January amid warmer-than-usual temperatures. 
However, lower natural gas production was expected to 
keep prices from falling significantly. 
Agriculture 
Farm income remained subdued in the Tenth District, 
and farmland values declined modestly since the last 
reporting period. Cattle, wheat, and corn prices were 
lower than a year ago in early February and continued to 
weigh on farm income in the District, despite slight im-
provements in hog and soybean prices. All District states 
reported slightly lower farm income and expected further 
declines in the coming months. Farmland values and 
cash rental rates for farmland continued to trend lower at 
a modest pace and were also expected to decline further 
in the months ahead. Alongside persistent declines in 
farm income and farmland values, agricultural credit 
conditions weakened modestly, as farm loan repayment 
rates edged lower and demand for short-term financing 
remained strong.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Eleventh District expanded moderately over the past six weeks. Manufacturing demand 
strengthened, and activity among nonfinancial services firms increased. Retail sales generally rose, although there were 
some reports of weakness. Housing demand was solid, with gains in home sales. Loan demand increased, and the 
energy sector improved modestly. The agricultural sector improved thanks to favorable weather and rising crop and 
cattle prices. Employment and wages increased, as did prices. Outlooks generally improved. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose, with hiring relatively strong in 
manufacturing and relatively weak in retail. Energy con-
tacts reported that layoffs were mostly done, and that 
there were even several signs of hiring activity ramping 
up. Reports of skilled labor shortages continued, particu-
larly in manufacturing and construction, and restaurant 
contacts said hiring qualified people remains a huge 
problem. Upward wage pressures were similar to the last 
reporting period. One contact remarked that increases in 
health care costs are more than they can pass on to 
employees.   
Prices 
Input costs continued to rise during the reporting period, 
with relatively strong upward pressure in manufacturing 
raw materials prices. Selling prices generally rose, with 
more widespread inflation reported among manufactur-
ers and retailers. Some services companies noted that 
input price increases remained difficult to pass along. 
Railroad contacts noted downward pressure on prices 
due to excess capacity. Oil prices held steady while 
natural gas prices drifted downward. Agricultural com-
modity prices generally increased. 
 
Manufacturing  
The manufacturing sector expanded again over the past 
six weeks. Output growth remained a bit stronger for 
durable goods than nondurables, although weakness 
persisted in fabricated metals —a segment with strong 
ties to the energy industry. However, a few fabricated 
metals manufacturers indicated activity has begun to 
increase in 2017. Exports remained a source of weak-
ness for firms that sell internationally, with the strong 
dollar and softness in Mexico’s economy hurting sales. 
Overall, outlooks remained positive. A few manufacturing 
contacts said their customers held a “wait and see” 
approach and that there is considerable uncertainty, 
including over the potential impacts related to policy 
changes from the Trump Administration. 
Gulf Coast refiners noted seasonally strong utilization 
rates, despite lower margins in January. The competitive 
advantage of domestic chemical manufacturers (who 
use natural gas instead of oil as an input) has increased 
in 2017 thanks to a larger spread between oil and natural 
gas prices. The outlook for chemical firms remained 
healthy because this feedstock cost advantage is ex-
pected to persist. Refinery business is not expected to 
fare as well in 2017 as in 2016, as large inventories and 
expectations of moderate demand growth will keep 
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
margins modest. 
Retail Sales 
Retail demand continued to rise during the reporting 
period, although at a slightly slower pace than the prior 
period. One clothing retailer said sales in border cities 
and energy-related areas remained sluggish. Auto sales 
declined, with one auto dealer noting that the January 
seasonal decline was greater than normal. Overall, 
outlooks among retailers remained mostly optimistic. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services generally continued to 
increase over the past six weeks, with numerous reports 
of rising business activity. Most staffing services firms 
saw a pickup in demand. Staffing demand remained 
particularly strong in Dallas, with a surge in information 
technology, and rose slightly in Houston, including in the 
oil and gas sector. Professional and technical services 
firms noted increased revenues, while several reports 
from leisure and hospitality firms cited declines. Trans-
portation services firms noted mixed movements in 
cargo volumes. Overall, most services firms noted im-
proved outlooks. However, several expressed concern 
about uncertainty surrounding the new administration’s 
potential policy changes and the resulting impact of 
those changes. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose during the reporting period, with con-
tacts noting a good start to 2017. Lot prices continued to 
escalate in DFW, were steady to up in Austin, and flat to 
down in Houston. Home prices remained elevated, alt-
hough some discounting was noted in Houston, and 
contacts there said it was becoming difficult to pass 
through further increases. Outlooks were positive, but 
contacts expressed some concern about downward 
pressure on builders’ margins and the potential impact of 
rising mortgage rates.  
Apartment demand stayed solid, and occupancy rates 
generally remained high. In Houston, despite better-than
-expected demand overall, occupancy dipped and rent 
concessions continued to be offered. This was particular-
ly the case for class A product due to a surplus of new 
deliveries and completions. Rents rose further in most 
major metros, but contacts expect rent growth to moder-
ate this year. Austin and DFW office markets remained 
strong, while continued weakness was noted in Houston. 
Industrial availability was tight in most major metros. 
 
Financial Services 
Loan demand increased over the past six weeks. Most 
respondents noted increased total loan balances, paral-
leled by improvement in general business activity. Com-
mercial real estate and mortgage loans were among the 
better performing categories over the reporting period, 
and consumer loan demand ticked up. Lenders involved 
in auto loans noted that delinquency rates continued to 
rise. Contacts reported higher interest rates charged on 
loans as well as higher interest rates paid on deposits. 
Respondents expressed optimism about loan demand 
and general business activity over the next six months. 
Energy 
Demand for oilfield services increased in the Permian 
Basin, and the district rig count increased. Outlooks for 
2017 were more positive than in the last reporting period, 
but remain slightly guarded. Contacts were unanimously 
negative in their expectations about the impact of the 
proposed border adjustment tax on their firms. Regard-
ing price risks for the year, firms noted a downward bias, 
with inventories keeping a lid on oil prices at around $60 
per barrel and lingering uncertainty around OPEC’s 
ability to achieve its targeted production cuts for the first 
half of 2017. 
Agriculture 
Moisture levels remained favorable across the district. 
The wheat crop was in great shape, and row crop pro-
ducers began field preparation in many areas and even 
started planting in some of the southern parts of Texas. 
Cattle prices continued to rally, due in part to seasonality 
but also a combination of ample demand and a tighter 
supply of cattle ready for market. Contacts noted an 
increase in beef exports. Cotton exports have been 
trending up so far this quarter, thanks in part to the 
strong quality of the 2016 cotton crop. Cotton prices 
were relatively strong, and contacts expect a large in-
crease in cotton acreage this year. Other crop prices 
trended up over the reporting period. Wheat prices still 
generally remained below breakeven prices, but corn 
and sorghum prices rose to a profitable level for many 
producers.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
January through February. Overall price inflation was mild, while upward wage pressures strengthened. Sales of retail 
goods picked up, and activity in the consumer and business services sector slowed slightly to a moderate pace. Condi-
tions in the manufacturing sector remained mixed, and activity in the agriculture sector was largely unchanged. Contacts 
reported continued vigorous activity in residential real estate markets, while activity in the commercial sector expanded 
at a moderate pace. Lending activity grew at a moderate pace. 
 
 
Employment and Wages  
Wage pressures intensified in general as labor market 
conditions remained tight throughout much of the Dis-
trict. Seasonal job loss in the retail sector was less pro-
nounced at the end of the holiday season than in previ-
ous years. Talent shortages in the technology industry 
have increased the time required to fill positions and the 
cost per hire. Contacts in the agriculture sector noted 
that proposed changes in immigration policy could limit 
labor supply, particularly during harvest season, and 
drive up wage costs. In the financial services industry, 
shortages of skilled bankers and credit analysts have 
boosted wages for those occupations. One contact in the 
hospitality industry reported a continued shortage of 
workers across all job categories despite wage increas-
es, signing bonuses, and increased recruiting efforts. 
Shortages of construction workers and contractors per-
sisted. 
Prices  
Overall price increases were mild during the reporting 
period. Prices of building materials increased from an 
already elevated level. While global prices remained low 
for many agricultural commodities, contacts reported that 
prices for some grains recently picked up. Pressure from 
online sellers slowed price inflation somewhat in parts of 
the retail sector. Contacts in the apparel industry noted 
that implementing a border tax could have a significant 
impact on the prices of imported apparel products. 
 
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales picked up from the previous period. On 
balance, contacts continued to report that e-commerce 
sales were strong, and retailers continued to shift invest-
ment away from traditional brick-and-mortar establish-
ments towards online channels. Retail supermarkets 
experienced solid sales volumes, and major chains 
continued to improve online retail and store pickup op-
tions. Demand for apparel products was moderate and 
flat relative to the previous reporting period. Sales of 
automobiles softened somewhat but remained compara-
ble to last year’s average pace. 
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
slowed slightly to a moderate pace. Robust demand for 
cloud computing services and investments in data cen-
ters continued to support strong growth in the technology 
service sector. While demand for health-care services 
expanded at a strong pace, and providers continued to 
innovate delivery systems, uncertainty surrounding fed-
eral health-care policy slowed capital investment. Tour-
ism picked up to a strong level, but contacts voiced 
concerns that changes in immigration policy would re-
duce international visits. Activity in the hospitality indus-
try weakened slightly, but advance bookings for the 
summer months at Southern California hotels were 
above levels experienced in the prior year. Contacts in 
the nonprofit sector noted that uncertainty around envi-
ronmental and alternative energy policy remained a 
major concern for growth prospects over the near term.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector remained mixed. 
New orders and production of manufactured pharmaceu-
ticals remained strong. Conditions in the semiconductor 
industry stabilized, but exporters remain concerned 
about the value of the dollar and potential trade conflicts. 
Contacts reported that steel mill capacity utilization re-
mained below its long-run average, as a strong dollar 
and weak global demand slowed exports and boosted 
imports. Orders of commercial aircraft dipped, and deliv-
eries were flat compared with the same period last year. 
Contacts in the metals fabrication industry noted that 
heavy equipment sales were weak, reducing demand for 
manufactured parts and accessories.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector was little changed from 
the previous reporting period. Demand for timber re-
mained strong, and contacts reported that domestic 
wood products manufacturers expanded production as 
input costs were low and margins remained favorable. A 
major buyer of barley notified producers in Idaho that 
their purchases would decrease by 30 percent in 2017. 
Weak global prices and increased production costs in 
California further reduced rice plantings. Overall, the 
elevated dollar continued to suppress agriculture ex-
ports. Wet winter conditions increased snowpack in the 
Sierra Nevada, and contacts expected increased water 
supplies to boost harvests later this year. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate market activity grew at a vigorous pace as in 
the previous reporting period. On balance, activity in the 
housing market remained strong, but conditions varied 
by region. Shortages of land, labor, and materials in 
many major cities in the West somewhat tempered the 
rapid pace of construction activity, while a few rural 
regions noted that tight financial conditions remained a 
barrier to new construction. House prices edged up 
further in much of the District, with contacts in Los Ange-
les reporting that many communities expect significant 
gentrification in the coming years. Rents continued to 
climb in parts of the District, making homeownership 
relatively more attractive. Commercial construction activ-
ity expanded at a moderate pace, except in downtown 
Sacramento, where construction activity continued to be 
robust. 
 
 
 
 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity continued to expand at a moderate pace 
over the reporting period. Loan demand grew at moder-
ate pace, similar to the prior period. One contact noted 
that consolidation in the financial services industry had 
reduced financing options for small businesses. On 
balance, deposits ticked up. Credit quality remained 
strong, and liquidity was ample. ■ 


