The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
September 12, 2018 
August 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
based on information collected on or before August 31, 2018. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Reports from the Federal Reserve Districts suggested that the economy expanded at a moderate pace through the end 
of August. Dallas reported relatively brisk growth, while Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Kansas City indicated somewhat 
below average growth. Consumer spending continued to grow at a modest pace since the last report, and tourism 
activity expanded, to varying degrees, across the nation. Manufacturing activity grew at a moderate rate in most Dis-
tricts, though St. Louis described business as little changed and Richmond reported a decline in activity. Transportation 
activity expanded, with a few Districts characterizing growth as robust. Home construction activity was mixed but up 
modestly, on balance. However, home sales were somewhat softer, on balance—in some cases due to reduced de-
mand, in others due more to low inventories. Commercial real estate construction was also mixed, while both sales and 
leasing activity expanded modestly. Lending activity grew throughout the nation. Some Districts noted weakness in 
agricultural conditions. Businesses generally remained optimistic about the near-term outlook, though most Districts 
noted concern and uncertainty about trade tensions—particularly though not only among manufacturers. A number of 
Districts noted that such concerns had prompted some businesses to scale back or postpone capital investment.  
Employment and Wages 
Labor markets continued to be characterized as tight throughout the country, with most Districts reporting widespread 
shortages. While construction workers, truck drivers, engineers, and other high-skill workers remained in short supply, 
a number of Districts also noted shortages of lower-skill workers at restaurants, retailers, and other types of firms. 
Employment grew modestly or moderately across most of the nation, though Dallas noted robust job growth, while 
three Districts reported little change that partly reflected a dearth of applicants. Six of the twelve Districts cited instanc-
es in which labor shortages were constraining sales or delaying projects. Wage growth was mostly characterized as 
modest or moderate, though a number of Districts cited steep wage hikes for construction workers. Some Districts 
indicated that businesses were increasingly using benefits—such as vacation time, flexible schedules, and bonuses—
to attract and retain workers, as well as putting more resources into training.  
Prices 
Prices of final goods and services continued to rise at a modest to moderate pace in most Districts, though there were 
some signs of a deceleration. All Districts noted fairly widespread input price pressures, particularly for construction 
materials and freight transportation. Tariffs were reported to be contributing to rising input costs, mainly for manufactur-
ers. Businesses’ input costs have generally been rising more rapidly than selling prices, though there have been in-
creased efforts to pass along cost hikes to customers. A few Districts noted some increase in inflation expectations. 
Boston 
Firms reported continued expansion of business activity. 
Retailers, manufacturers, and staffing firms cited year-
over-year increases in revenues and sales. Labor mar-
kets remained tight amid little net hiring. Contacts report-
ed only modest increases in prices, if any. Outlooks 
continued to be positive.  
 
New York 
The regional economy expanded at a moderate pace, 
and labor markets have remained tight. Input price in-
creases have remained widespread, while firms’ selling 
prices have decelerated somewhat. Housing markets 
have softened, on balance, while commercial real estate 
markets have firmed a bit.  
 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest pace. 
With tight labor markets, wages grew moderately despite 
incremental job growth. On balance, contacts continued 
to observe modest price increases but expressed grow-
ing concern for future inflation. Notably, manufacturing 
slowed to a modest pace of growth, and nearly two-
thirds of the manufacturers reported rising prices paid.  
Cleveland 
The District economy grew at a moderate pace. Labor 
markets tightened, and wage pressures were noted 
broadly. Cost pressures among manufacturers and con-
struction firms continued, especially for metals, construc-
tion materials, and transportation. Stronger confidence in 
the economy boosted demand in nonfinancial services 
and the retail sector. Construction activity weakened. 
Richmond 
The regional economy grew moderately in recent weeks. 
Port and transportation activity remained robust. Busi-
ness travel and tourism was also strong throughout the 
Fifth District. Meanwhile, manufacturers gave mixed 
accounts as some firms were unable to pass along 
higher input prices. Labor demand strengthened, and 
employers continued to report difficulties finding qualified 
workers. Prices grew moderately, overall. 
Atlanta 
The Sixth District economy expanded at a moderate 
pace. Labor markets remained tight, and wage pres-
sures increased for some firms. Most nonlabor input 
costs were stable. Retail sales improved further. On 
balance, the pace of nonresidential construction was flat 
compared with year-earlier levels, while residential con-
struction activity was up. Manufacturing activity contin-
ued to grow. 
Chicago 
Growth picked up to a moderate pace. Manufacturing 
production and employment grew moderately, consumer 
and business spending increased modestly, and con-
struction and real estate activity was up slightly. Wages 
and prices rose modestly, and financial conditions im-
proved slightly. Overall crop yields appeared set to forge 
a new record. 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions improved slightly. Labor market 
conditions remained tight, and wage growth was modest. 
Manufacturers facing higher input prices reported pass-
ing those costs along to their customers. Agriculture 
contacts estimated that the majority of the soybean crop 
has not yet been priced, leaving farmers exposed to 
current market conditions.   
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity expanded moderately. 
Employment grew strongly, despite continued labor 
constraints. Hiring demand was robust, and wage growth 
was moderate to strong. Price pressures increased 
moderately overall. Manufacturing activity increased, but 
contacts in manufacturing and agriculture remained 
concerned about negative impacts from trade re-
strictions. Summer tourism grew moderately overall. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity expanded modestly in late July and 
August, including gains in consumer spending, manufac-
turing, wholesale trade, transportation, high-tech, and 
professional services. Manufacturing contacts noted that 
recent trade developments had led to higher input prices 
and lower capital spending plans for some firms. Pro-
longed weaknesses in the agricultural sector were in-
creasingly impacting farm borrower finances. 
Dallas 
Economic activity expanded at a solid pace. Manufactur-
ing and service sectors sustained a healthy pace of 
growth, while activity in the housing and energy sectors 
was flat to down. Retail spending accelerated, as did 
loan demand. Wages and other input costs rose, but 
firms’ ability to pass these increases on to customers 
was limited. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Conditions in the labor 
market tightened further, and price inflation increased 
moderately. Sales of retail goods picked up moderately, 
and activity in the consumer and business services 
sectors edged down slightly. Activity in the manufactur-
ing sector expanded modestly. Activity in residential and 
commercial real estate markets was solid. Lending activ-
ity ticked up modestly. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the First District expanded at a moderate pace since the last report. Responding retailers, manufac-
turers, and staffing firms cited year-over-year increases in sales and revenues in recent weeks. In most reporting areas 
in the region, residential real estate markets saw increases in both closed sales and prices. Activity in commercial real 
estate markets was generally steady; contacts noted rising construction costs. Staffing firms as well as respondents in 
retail and manufacturing cited tight labor markets; wage pressures varied. Prices rose modestly if at all, despite increas-
ing freight costs. Overall, the outlook continued to be positive.  
Employment and Wages  
Most contacts said labor markets were tight; net hiring 
remained modest to nil while wage increases were 
mixed. Retail hiring continued at a modest pace; con-
tacts reported wage pressures varied across the region. 
The labor shortage for restaurant workers continued to 
be very troublesome, particularly on the Cape: contacts 
cited not enough U.S. workers and not enough visas for 
seasonal foreign workers. Most manufacturing contacts 
have not increased headcount. They reported that locat-
ing engineers and skilled machinists remained difficult, 
but assembly line and administrative workers were not 
hard to find. Staffing firms cited increasing labor demand 
and decreasing labor supply across the board, a combi-
nation that continued to present challenges, especially 
for recruiting skilled workers. Some staffing firms noted 
increases in bill and pay rates, ranging from low single 
digits to 10 percent.   
Prices  
Prices were reported to be unchanged or up slightly. 
Retail contacts indicated that selling prices remained 
steady, on average; one prominent retailer noted that 
food prices were up somewhat, but its overall retail price 
level was flat because of lower prices in other catego-
ries. However, higher fuel prices and a scarcity of truck-
ers continued to drive up freight costs; manufacturers 
also noted increased trucking costs. Five of nine manu-
facturing contacts reported that their selling prices had 
gone up, but increases were small. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retailers contacted in this round said that year-over-year 
comparable-store sales ranged from low to mid-single 
digit increases from a year earlier. Two firms reported 
overall sales increases in the double digits due to busi-
ness expansion. Apparel sales were particularly strong, 
as were sales of electronics and seasonal items. Con-
tacts expressed concern and uncertainty regarding tar-
iffs, particularly for inputs and goods sourced from Chi-
na, such as cotton, electronics, and furniture. Absent the 
tariff issue, expectations for sales were positive through 
the end of 2018. 
A contact in the Massachusetts restaurant industry re-
ported that sales were up 4.6 percent in 2018 through 
June 30, based on meal tax receipts. Restaurant sales in 
July were up 7.1 percent year-over-year, a robust in-
crease that was partly attributed to hot and humid weath-
er and many rainy weekends; with this weather pattern 
continuing, sales through the end of August were ex-
pected to be strong as well. Menu prices were up about 
2.6 percent year-over-year, driven by higher operating 
costs: wholesale food prices were up, as were costs 
associated with insurance, labor, and rent. The cost 
challenges confronting the restaurant industry were 
reportedly inducing caution about expansion.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
All contacted manufacturers reported higher sales than 
in their last reports. Growth was consistent across geog-
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston  
raphies and industries. A semiconductor contact said 
that slowing smartphone expansion led the firm’s growth 
to slow slightly, although it remains positive. A maker of 
motion-control equipment said that tariffs on steel and 
aluminum had led those metal producers to increase 
capital spending and demand for capital goods. By con-
trast, First District contacts cited no major revisions to 
their capital spending plans; they indicated that tax re-
form made investment somewhat more attractive but did 
not change the basic calculations. 
Most contacts noted the tariff issue but said that, so far, 
the effects have been small and they did not expect too 
much damage if they are expanded. A gun manufacturer 
said that they had locked in steel prices for two years 
prior to the tariffs. A contact in the motion-control indus-
try said they expected to pass on any tariffs in the form 
of surcharges or price increases.  
Manufacturing respondents’ outlooks remained positive. 
Most had not revised their outlook recently, but a capital 
equipment manufacturer said they had raised their inves-
tor guidance at the end of July versus February.  
Staffing Services  
New England staffing firms continued to grow over the 
summer; nearly all responding firms reported year-over-
year revenue growth, ranging from the low single-digits 
to as much as about 20 percent. Some firms reported 
spending more to attract and retain talent, including the 
adoption of new technology and incentive programs. 
Demand for permanent workers is greater than for tem-
porary workers, but supply issues are even more pro-
nounced for temporary positions, making temp vacan-
cies more difficult to fill. Some contacts stated that be-
cause the New England economy is faring better than 
the rest of the country, labor supply is even more chal-
lenging in New England than elsewhere.  
While they all expressed concern about labor supply, 
staffing contacts expressed optimism about upcoming 
quarters; they expect to finish the year strong. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity held roughly steady on 
balance in recent months, although rising construction 
costs and shortages of construction labor were seen as 
growing constraints. Office and warehouse leasing de-
mand remained strong in Boston and Portland amid low 
vacancy rates, resulting in positive but slow net absorp-
tion and further upward pressure on rents. The Hartford 
area continued to experience weaker leasing activity 
than Boston or Portland, although conditions were seen 
as mostly stable and distribution space enjoyed decent 
demand.  
The financing environment remained favorable for com-
mercial real estate construction and investment in the 
First District, and recent loan deals were seen as safe in 
the sense of involving relatively low amounts of leverage. 
Construction was stable but mixed across areas and 
sectors; multifamily housing and hospitality continued to 
lead. Commercial real estate contacts said that construc-
tion costs had increased moderately-to-steeply in recent 
months, and the increases were attributed in part to 
rising materials costs—stemming partly from tariffs on 
imported goods—and in part to rising wages for scarce 
construction labor. The tight construction labor market 
also contributed to delays in project completions. Con-
tacts maintained a mostly favorable outlook. 
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in Boston and four First 
District states with available data showed brisk sales 
activity in the month of July; current data were unavaila-
ble for Connecticut and Vermont. For single family 
homes, closed sales increased in all reporting areas but 
Rhode Island. For condos, closed sales increased in all 
reporting areas except Maine. Rhode Island saw some 
improvements in inventory and supply. The Rhode Island 
contact noted, “Last month marked the first time in nearly 
two years that the single-family home inventory climbed 
above 4,000. All indications are that the market may 
have reached the point at which supply and demand 
begin to become more balanced.”  
Median sales prices increased in most reporting areas, 
but not Rhode Island. Contacts expressed concern that a 
seller’s market environment was distorting house prices. 
A Massachusetts contact said that some level of price 
correction would be healthy for the current market, to 
reduce buyer discouragement and seller concerns about 
finding a home to buy after they sell. A contact from New 
Hampshire also commented, “Housing-price-bubble 
chatter has increased this summer. It is too early to 
predict a change, but the common markers that caused 
the last housing cool-down are present.”■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District expanded at a moderate pace in the latest reporting period. The labor market 
has continued to be tight, while wage growth has remained steady. Widespread increases in input prices persisted, but 
there have been signs of a slight deceleration in selling prices. Manufacturing activity continued to grow briskly, while 
businesses in most service and distribution industries reported more modest growth. Consumer spending was generally 
steady in recent weeks. Housing markets have softened somewhat, on balance, while commercial real estate markets 
have firmed slightly. Finally, banks reported continued growth in loan demand and little change in delinquency rates. 
    
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight across the District. 
Employers continued to note trouble filling senior posi-
tions and finding technically skilled workers—particularly 
IT workers and engineers, as well as truck drivers and 
construction workers. One retail contact also noted 
difficulty in finding cashiers and sales associates. Some 
business contacts in upstate New York have faced chal-
lenges attracting skilled and specialized workers to rural 
areas and even smaller cities. A New York City employ-
ment agency noted that the labor market has remained 
tight, and anticipates brisk hiring to resume after Labor 
Day, following the usual summer lull.    
Hiring activity has been steady overall but mixed by 
industry. Business contacts in manufacturing, wholesale 
trade, and finance continued to report fairly brisk hiring 
activity. In contrast, firms in retail trade, leisure & hospi-
tality, and transportation indicated steady to slightly 
declining staffing levels, though they plan to add workers 
in the months ahead. A payroll service firm observed 
some further slowing in job growth at small businesses.   
Businesses in most service industries indicated that 
wage pressures remain fairly widespread, though they 
have not intensified. A major New York State employer 
noted success in using non-wage benefits (e.g., vaca-
tion, flexible hours) to attract younger workers. Looking 
ahead, fewer businesses indicated planned wage in-
creases than had been the case in recent months.           
Prices  
Businesses continued to report widespread hikes in input 
prices—particularly in manufacturing, wholesale trade, 
and education & health. Contacts in almost all sectors 
anticipated further increases in the months ahead, with a 
sizable number of contacts indicating that tariffs were 
driving up costs, particularly in the manufacturing sector.  
As for selling prices, however, fewer businesses than in 
recent months said they were raising their prices—
particularly in the wholesale trade sector. One notable 
exception was in the education & health industry, where 
contacts noted some acceleration in prices received. 
Retailers generally indicated that selling prices have 
remained stable, with one contact noting widespread 
discounting on remaining summer merchandise. A num-
ber of wholesale trade and transportation contacts said 
they planned to hike prices in the months ahead.      
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were mostly steady in July and August. 
While somewhat more retail contacts indicated declining 
than increasing sales, a major retail chain noted that 
sales rose and were above plan in both months, running 
2-4 percent ahead of comparable 2017 levels. Sales at 
New York City stores slowed slightly, but were still up 
moderately from a year earlier. Retailers in upstate New 
York reported that sales were mostly soft in July but 
picked up in August.  
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that new 
vehicle sales were fairly soft in July, running below year-
ago levels, but showed signs of picking up in August. 
New vehicle inventories remained at or above desired 
levels. Meanwhile, sales of used vehicles strengthened 
further. Dealers generally characterized retail and whole-
sale credit conditions as being in good shape, though 
one contact reported some pullback toward the lower 
end of the retail credit market. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) retreated from a cyclical high, based on the 
Conference Board’s survey, though the public’s assess-
ment of the job market climbed to new highs.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers indicated that activity continued to expand 
at a brisk pace since the last report. Transportation firms 
reported modest growth, while wholesale distributors 
noted a typical seasonal slowdown in growth. Regarding 
the near-term business outlook, wholesale distributors 
and manufacturers expressed ongoing optimism, while 
transportation industry contacts have become less up-
beat. A sizable number of contacts in these sectors 
noted that recent hikes in tariffs have raised their overall 
input costs, and some have expressed concern about 
the effects of changes in trade policy on various aspects 
of their business. One utility firm noted that tariffs on 
some construction materials may force them to scale 
back capital investment a bit.       
Services 
Service-sector firms reported mixed results in the latest 
reporting period. Businesses in the education & health 
service sector noted a pickup in activity, whereas con-
tacts in information and professional & business services 
indicated that activity continued to expand at a subdued 
pace. Businesses in leisure & hospitality reported a slight 
dip in activity, though tourism in New York showed con-
tinued strength, as both hotels and Broadway theaters 
reported brisk business. Looking ahead, leisure & hospi-
tality businesses expressed growing optimism about the 
near-term outlook, and contacts in the service sector 
generally remained sanguine. Information industry con-
tacts were noticeably less upbeat than in the prior report.           
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, softer since the last report. Home sales 
activity dropped off sharply in New York City—especially 
in Manhattan. Selling prices have remained mostly flat, 
though one real estate expert interpreted the drop-off in 
sales as suggesting a decline in underlying values and 
partly attributes this to the new federal tax law. In con-
trast, housing markets in parts of upstate New York have 
shown continued strength. One contact reported growing 
interest among homebuyers in neighborhoods of Buffalo 
and Niagara Falls previously considered less desirable. 
There was also said to be rising interest in renovating 
abandoned buildings in Albany, Troy, and Schenectady 
for both homeownership and mixed-use development. 
The inventory of unsold homes has remained very low 
across the District, though it has risen in New York City. 
The apartment rental market has been mixed but gener-
ally steady. Rents have continued to drift down in Man-
hattan but have been steady to somewhat higher in 
Brooklyn and Queens. Vacancy rates have remained 
very low, as landlord concessions have remained wide-
spread but not risen. Outside New York City, apartment 
rents have continued to trend up modestly, running 2-3 
percent ahead of a year earlier.   
Commercial real estate markets have firmed slightly. 
Office availability rates declined modestly in northern 
New Jersey, Westchester, and Fairfield counties. Office 
markets were steady in Manhattan and upstate New 
York, but slackened modestly in Long Island. The market 
for industrial space continued to strengthen, particularly 
in northern New Jersey, where availability rates fell to 
multi-year lows and rents continued to climb, posting 
double-digit percentage gains from a year ago. 
New multi-family construction starts reportedly slipped in 
recent weeks. New office construction has picked up 
slightly but remains subdued, while there has been very 
little new industrial construction. In all these categories, 
however, there continues to be a good deal of ongoing 
construction in progress.        
Banking and Finance 
Financial services firms reported increasingly robust 
growth in activity but were somewhat less optimistic 
regarding the near-term outlook. Small to medium-sized 
banks reported higher demand for consumer loans and 
residential mortgages, but flat demand for commercial 
mortgages and C&I loans. Refinancing activity was 
reported to be steady. Bankers reported tighter credit 
standards for C&I loans, lower loan spreads across all 
categories, and widespread increases in average deposit 
rates. Delinquency rates fell across all loan categories.  
for C&I loans but no change in delinquencies across all 
other loan categories.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Likewise, employment sustained modest growth, but wages continued to grow moderately as the labor market 
remained tight. While manufacturers reported paying higher prices, other contacts reported no current shift in inflation 
trends, but many worried that tariffs would trigger future inflation. Nonfinancial services maintained a moderate pace of 
growth, but manufacturers reported a more modest pace than last period. Most consumer sectors continued at a modest 
pace. The construction and real estate sectors continued to issue mixed reports with declines in residential real estate 
sales and nonresidential construction, while contacts from new home construction and nonresidential leasing noted 
some growth. The growth outlook over the next six months remained positive, with over half of all firms anticipating 
increases in general activity. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. Manufacturing and non-
manufacturing firms have reported ongoing net additions 
to staff since last period; more nonmanufacturers were 
hiring, but fewer manufacturing firms did so. Average 
hours worked rose further over the period for both manu-
facturing firms and nonmanufacturers.  
Staffing firms continued to report incremental growth in 
job orders but ongoing difficulty attracting and retaining 
employees. One firm noted that temp-to-hire orders had 
increased, giving clients a three- to four-month trial, 
while avoiding recruiting and onboarding costs. Recruit-
ing challenges prompted one restaurant – that was 
staffing up to enter the downtown Philadelphia market – 
to experiment with a storefront table taking job applica-
tions.  
On balance, wage growth continued at a moderate pace. 
Once again, over half of the nonmanufacturing contacts 
reported increases in wage and benefit costs. Staffing 
firms reported no dramatic changes in wage trends; even 
in labor markets with the District’s lowest unemployment 
rates, wages were said to “continue to inch up.”  
 
Prices  
Price increases remained modest for most firms but 
were stronger for prices faced by manufacturers. Among 
nonmanufacturing firms, less than one-third reported 
increases for prices paid and for prices received –  
somewhat lower than in the prior period. One-third of the 
manufacturing firms continued to report increases in 
prices received for their own goods; however, more 
manufacturers paid higher prices this period, with nearly 
two-thirds noting increases. Bankers and other contacts 
cited labor shortages, wage pressures, and tariffs as 
concerns for spurring inflation, but none reported evi-
dence of current inflation.  
Looking ahead one year, firms’ inflationary expectations 
for prices of their own goods and services have risen 
slightly from one quarter earlier, on balance; however, 
for manufacturing firms alone, inflationary expectations 
fell slightly. The firms reported higher expectations for 
overall consumer inflation.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity slowed to a modest pace of 
growth – nearer to nonrecession averages than the 
moderate pace of the prior period. About 35 percent of 
the firms reported an increase in shipments and new 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
orders, while over 20 percent of the firms reported de-
creases.  
The makers of lumber products, chemicals, primary 
metals, and fabricated metal products tended to note 
gains in new orders and shipments; the makers of elec-
tronic machinery and industrial machinery reported 
mixed results. Nearly two-thirds of the firms that offered 
general comments noted that price hikes and/or supply 
disruptions had already occurred or were anticipated 
because of tariffs and the threat of tariffs. For those firms 
already impacted, contacts often cited double-digit price 
increases; some typical responses were that tariffs “have 
put us out of business” on certain products and “are a 
cloud on every facet of our business planning.” 
On balance, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
general activity to increase over the next six months. The 
percentage of firms expecting future increases edged 
above 50 percent; however, the percentage of firms 
expecting decreases also edged upward. The firms’ 
outlook for future employment and future capital expend-
itures remained nearly the same, with just under 40 
percent expecting increases.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retailers continued to report modest sales 
growth in July and August, citing rising consumer de-
mand and stable gas prices. Ongoing price sensitivity by 
consumers continued to be met by heavy promotional 
discounting. Retailers noted rising costs for land devel-
opment and freight but no direct impacts from tariffs.  
Auto dealers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania reported 
year-over-year sales that had essentially matched levels 
from the summer of 2017. Likewise, year-to-date sales 
appear to be holding even with 2017’s high levels. Deal-
ers continued to worry about rising interest rates.  
Tourism contacts continued to report modest growth 
overall. One analyst noted that there was a slowdown in 
travelers from China and that U.S. households have 
been funding travel from savings – a trend deemed 
unsustainable. A shore hotelier reported very high traffic 
but low spending rates at restaurants and shops. Two 
recent casino (re)openings appear to have lifted all  
Atlantic City casinos in June; however, July reports 
suggest the new entrants are primarily extracting market 
share. Internet and sports gambling has extended the 
New Jersey market a bit, even as neighboring states 
begin to compete on the same platforms.  
 
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms continued to report 
moderate growth in general activity. The percentage of 
firms reporting increased sales rose over 50 percent, 
while the percentage reporting increased new orders fell 
but remained above 40 percent. One firm noted its “best 
accounts receivable in the last decade.” Expectations of 
future growth narrowed slightly, but still nearly two-thirds 
of the firms anticipated increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report modest growth in 
overall loan volumes (excluding credit cards) – a slightly 
slower pace than during the same period last year. Vol-
umes grew moderately in mortgages and in other con-
sumer loans (not elsewhere classified) and grew mod-
estly in commercial real estate lending and in auto loans. 
However, these gains were offset by slight declines in 
home equity lines and in commercial and industrial lend-
ing. Compared with one year earlier, loans grew modest-
ly and in all categories except for home equity lines.  
During the current period, credit card lending grew at a 
modest pace – comparable with the same period last 
year for this highly seasonal measure. Credit card lend-
ing has also grown modestly over the entire year.  
Banking contacts noted ongoing challenges from “overly” 
competitive loan terms and bank deposit rates but gener-
ally cited greater business optimism and growing loan 
demand. The bankers also reported no signs of credit 
quality deterioration.  
Real Estate and Construction 
On balance, homebuilders reported slight growth in new 
contracts but little change in construction activity. Sales 
of existing homes continued to decline moderately com-
pared with the same period last year. However, as the 
period progressed, sales began to rise a bit in a few 
markets, despite ongoing low inventories.  
Overall, rents continued to rise in the slowly growing 
nonresidential real estate market, especially for offices 
and industrial warehouses. Higher office rents have been 
driven, in part, by outside investors, then partially offset 
by concessions, while underlying demand continued to 
support new construction and rising rates for ware-
houses. On balance, nonresidential construction activity 
continued to slowly wane in most markets. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District grew moderately during the survey period. Demand was strong in many sectors, 
but hiring continued at about the same pace as in the previous survey period. Contacts reported ongoing shortages of 
qualified workers, and many firms stepped up their training programs to alleviate the shortage. Firms increased wages, 
bonuses, and incentives to reduce worker turnover, although the increases were in line with recent trends. Upward 
pressure on input costs was strong, notably for metals, construction materials, and transportation services. Final selling 
prices increased as manufacturers, builders, and transportation firms raised their prices to cover their increased input 
costs. Consumer demand, including for autos, was stable to slightly higher. Manufacturing capacity utilization rose to 
meet strong demand. Freight volumes trended higher. Construction activity weakened as rising prices took some steam 
out of demand.  
Employment and Wages  
Staffing levels and wages rose moderately during the 
reporting period in a similar fashion to rises in recent 
survey periods. Hiring in professional services quickened 
thanks to stronger demand for technology services. 
Construction hiring was strong, as well, with firms’ hiring 
entry-level, intermediate, and senior-level managers to 
accommodate the high volume of work. One nonresiden-
tial builder reported hiring slightly more-recently graduat-
ed engineers than in the year before. Hiring was weakest 
in banking, as some firms reduced expenses by trimming 
nonsales or non-customer-facing staff.  
Contacts across many sectors often cited a shortage of 
quality labor as a constraint to hiring. A number of firms 
are boosting training efforts and considering alternatives 
to alleviate the shortage. One manufacturer reported 
trying an onsite training program to transition general 
laborers into more-skilled positions. A trucking contact 
reported implementing an apprenticeship program to 
attract younger workers. Overall wage pressures were in 
line with the moderate trends seen so far in 2018. A few 
transportation and manufacturing contacts reported that 
they were having to give off-cycle wage increases to 
retain workers. One auto dealer increased incentives 
and starting pay for midlevel technicians, while a retailer 
noted the contact’s firm’s new bonus program had 
helped keep turnover in check. One banker noted raising 
wages for more experienced professionals because 
these professionals were more mobile.  
Prices  
Both input prices and final selling prices continued to rise 
and anecdotes suggest price pressures were similar to 
those of the previous two survey periods. Contacts re-
ported strong upward pressure on nonlabor costs, espe-
cially for metals and transportation services. Price in-
creases for plywood, lumber, and concrete were also 
noted. One construction contact remarked that suppliers 
would guarantee a price for a few days only. There was 
some concern that the impact of tariffs would soon filter 
through the supply chain in the form of higher prices of 
new transportation equipment, including trucks and 
trailers. Also, one retailer pointed out that the firm was 
beginning to see an increase in the firm’s costs because 
of import tariffs. 
Final selling prices trended higher. Construction firms 
aggressively raised their prices to pass along higher 
materials costs. The majority of transportation contacts 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
raised their freight rates thanks to strong demand and 
limited capacity in the sector. More than half of manufac-
turing contacts raised their prices for a fourth consecu-
tive reporting period. Service-sector industries reported 
relatively more modest price increases as firms attempt-
ed to cover rising worker compensation costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Retail demand improved moderately, continuing a nearly 
year-long trend, and contacts expected this positive 
trend to continue in the near term. Clothing retailers and 
auto dealers were most upbeat about their sales in the 
current reporting period. Auto dealers indicated that 
demand was improving thanks to strong consumer confi-
dence, a tighter labor market, and stable financing condi-
tions. They also reported that SUVs and light trucks 
continued to outsell passenger vehicles. Retailers with 
broad footprints noted that sales within the Fourth Dis-
trict were roughly in line with national demand. Profit 
margins were stable, and inventory levels were reported 
to be in good condition.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported stronger conditions and attribut-
ed the increased demand to a strong overall economy 
and pro-growth fiscal policy. One steel manufacturer 
noted that even though July is typically a soft month for 
new orders, demand remained strong this summer. Most 
manufacturers reported that capacity utilization had been 
within a normal range during the last two months, alt-
hough some firms had increased their capacity utilization 
because of a backlog of orders. Some manufacturers 
were concerned about increased lead times due to rising 
freight costs and a scarcity of specialty metals. There 
were some reports that automotive manufacturing had 
slowed slightly, but other end markets such as industrial 
equipment, agricultural equipment, and construction 
remained strong. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Demand for new homes fell during the survey period, 
and homebuilders expected further decreases in the 
near future. The drop in sales was concentrated in high-
er-end homes; sales of lower-priced homes were steadi-
er. Although homebuilders were able to pass along 
higher materials costs to preserve margins, they noted 
that rising home prices were a factor weighing on sales. 
Contacts reported stable first-time-homebuyer demand 
and stable financing conditions, along with an increase in 
the percentage of homeowners relative to renters. 
Nonresidential builders reported that conditions moderat-
ed from the high levels seen in recent survey periods. 
Inquiries were down, especially for government and 
industrial projects. However, builders did not expect 
conditions to continue to worsen. Backlogs were still 
strong, and some builders were trying to expand their 
workforces to address their backlogs. Rising materials 
costs, especially of steel, lumber, conduit, and concrete, 
motivated nonresidential builders to raise their prices. 
However, while builders successfully passed through 
these cost increases, they believed the market was too 
tight to improve their profit margins. 
Financial Services 
Conditions in the financial services sector remained 
steady. During most of 2018, demand for credit had 
been strong, and in the current period, contacts mostly 
reported no change from this trend. Most contacts were 
optimistic about current economic conditions and ex-
pected the pipeline for loans to remain strong. Changes 
in core deposits were mixed. One contact indicated that 
wholesale customers continued to draw down balances 
instead of relying on credit. Another contact indicated 
that promotional increases in interest rates on deposits—
especially certificates of deposit—bolstered deposit 
growth. Contacts are watching closely as interest rates 
rise, but they have not reported notable increases in 
delinquency rates or credit charge-offs.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms reported strong demand 
thanks to generally favorable economic conditions. Busi-
ness advisory firms and software developers reported 
strong activity. Contacts noted that in addition to tax 
savings and ongoing strong business confidence, their 
services were in demand because businesses were 
modernizing their IT infrastructures and attempting to 
automate their processes. Capital investments held 
steady. Transportation firms reported continued increas-
es in freight volumes. Railroad contacts attributed some 
of their volume growth to ongoing capacity constraints in 
the trucking industry. ■ 
 
 
 
 
 
 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate rate since our previous Beige Book. Manufacturers gave mixed 
reports as some saw robust growth while others struggled with higher input prices that they were unable to pass along. 
District ports continued to report high volumes of imports and exports but expressed some concerns for the near future. 
Trucking remained strong and demand continued to exceed capacity, leading some firms to turn away business or to 
look toward increasing fleet size. Business travel and tourism was robust throughout the Fifth District. Meanwhile, retail-
ers reported moderate growth, overall. Residential real estate conditions improved moderately as sales increased and 
home prices moved higher. Commercial real estate demand strengthened for industrial and retail space while office 
leasing demand varied by location. Loan demand rose modestly, overall, as short term interest rates ticked up. Demand 
for nonfinancial services grew moderately. Overall, labor demand strengthened and job openings increased as employ-
ers struggled to find qualified workers. Prices grew at a moderate rate, on balance.  
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks, and employment agencies reported growth in 
new job openings. Meanwhile, employers continued to 
report tight labor markets and difficulties finding qualified 
workers. Staffing firms indicated that job openings in-
creased for customer service representatives, adminis-
trative assistants, medical professionals, and construc-
tion workers. Additionally, firms reported high demand 
for construction workers, electricians, engineers, pilots, 
logistics workers, accountants, IT professionals, audi-
tors, financial analysts, marketing/sales managers, plant 
workers, mechanics, and truckers. Wage increases 
remained modest, overall. 
Prices  
On balance, prices grew at a moderate rate since our 
previous report. According to our latest surveys, manu-
facturing input prices rose moderately and continued to 
outpace selling prices. Specifically, rising prices were 
noted for aluminum, lumber, chemicals, rayon, polyester 
fiber, paper, and fuel. Conversely, copper prices were 
reportedly down slightly. Meanwhile, service sector firms 
indicated that both their prices paid and prices received 
grew at a moderate rate. Firms across both manufactur-
ing and service sectors saw higher shipping costs. Last-
ly, coal and crude oil prices increased in recent weeks 
while natural gas prices were stable.  
Manufacturing 
Fifth District manufacturers gave mixed reports in recent 
weeks. Many firms reported robust business and opti-
mism, such as a Virginia window manufacturer who 
attributed the best business they have had in years to 
high consumer confidence. However, other firms gave 
more negative reports as they were unable to pass 
through to customers rising materials costs as a result of 
recent tariffs. A Maryland can manufacturer feared price 
increases would lead to permanent business losses as 
customers would look for alternative forms of packaging. 
Manufacturers also struggled as a result of the truck 
shortage, reporting rising shipping costs and delayed 
deliveries. 
Ports and Transportation 
District ports have continued to report robust activity. 
One port saw record volumes of imports but a slight 
decrease in exports while another port reported strong 
growth in both imports and exports. A District airport 
reported seeing strong growth but was cautious about 
making capital expenditures over concerns that business 
might soften as a result of new tariffs. While some port 
contacts have not yet seen any effects from the tariffs, 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
they expressed concerns, noting that the effects may be 
delayed since shipments are often planned well in ad-
vance. One port also anticipated losing some inland 
business soon as a result of trucking shortages. 
Trucking activity remained strong in recent weeks, and 
some companies continued to turn away business be-
cause they did not have enough trucks or drivers to 
meet demand. A Virginia executive reported trying to 
increase his fleet to meet demand, despite rising equip-
ment costs, and believed that his competitive compen-
sation would attract more drivers. In North Carolina, a 
company reported seeing their lowest-ever operating 
ratio as they are able to raise prices and be selective 
about what size shipments to handle.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Tourism was robust in recent weeks. Hotels in the Dis-
trict of Columbia were able to increase rates because of 
strong business. Meanwhile, in North Carolina, healthy 
tourist activity boosted business for shops and restau-
rants. In South Carolina, increased business travel is 
keeping demand for hotels high, but the recent increase 
in supply kept prices from rising. Resorts in Virginia and 
West Virginia saw strong business despite setbacks 
from bad weather. Short-term rentals received a boost 
from workers on the Atlantic Coastal Pipeline. 
District retailers reported moderate business conditions 
since our last report. A West Virginia sporting-goods 
retailer saw strong back-to-school business but sup-
pressed profit margins as costs, particularly for shipping, 
increased. Meanwhile, a Virginia home goods store 
credited an uptick in business to strong tourism, and a 
high-end clothing store saw strong customer traffic and 
sales. Some retailers attributed higher input prices to 
recent tariffs and were hesitant to make long-term busi-
ness decisions.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased modestly, alt-
hough agents reported a slight decline in buyer traffic. 
Inventory levels remained low across markets, and 
brokers stated that the lack of inventory was restricting 
home sales. However, most agents described the mar-
ket as healthy and expected activity to remain steady in 
the coming months. Home prices rose modestly, while 
days on the market were generally unchanged at low 
levels. New home construction and sales increased 
modestly while speculative construction was limited. 
Builders continued to struggle to meet production time-
lines due to the lack of available and qualified roofers, 
framers, and siding crews. A broker in Virginia noted an 
increase in house flipping and remodels.  
Commercial real estate leasing activity rose modestly in 
recent weeks as brokers reported increased demand in 
the industrial and retail markets. Office leasing activity 
was mixed across the District. Brokers in South Carolina, 
West Virginia, and Virginia reported slower office leasing 
activity in recent weeks, while agents in North Carolina 
and the District of Columbia reported modest increases. 
Vacancy rates decreased slightly in some office markets 
and were unchanged in the retail and industrial markets. 
Rental rates for all sub-markets were stable to increasing 
modestly. On the commercial sales side, brokers report-
ed modest increases in prices and sales. Industrial and 
retail construction increased modestly, but there were no 
reports of new office construction projects. 
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan demand rose modestly in recent weeks. 
Reports on residential mortgage demand varied by loca-
tion but was generally described as stable to increasing 
modestly. On the commercial side, real estate loan de-
mand strengthened modestly in most locations, and 
remained particularly strong in the District of Columbia. 
Business loan demand improved slightly, on balance, 
and automotive lending was reportedly flat compared to 
the previous report. On balance, short term interest rates 
increased slightly in recent weeks as deposits grew 
modestly and competition among banks remained 
strong. Credit quality remained stable at strong levels.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Overall, the demand for nonfinancial services continued 
to grow at a moderate rate in recent weeks. Firms in 
engineering, telecommunication, and healthcare services 
were particularly positive. A hospital reported strong 
earnings and higher Medicaid reimbursements. Mean-
while, a few professional services firms that rely on 
government spending reported stronger demand. On the 
downside, several contacts mentioned that labor con-
straints were holding back growth. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity expanded at a moderate pace since the previous report. 
On balance, the outlook among firms for the remainder of the year was positive, despite some uncertainty surrounding 
trade policy. Firms continued to cite hiring challenges, especially for low-skilled and hourly positions. Some businesses 
reported growing wage pressure. Rising nonlabor costs for select inputs such as transportation and steel were noted, as 
was an improved ability to pass through price increases. Retailers reported growth in sales, and automotive dealers 
indicated sales were up year-over-year. Tourism in the District was described as solid over the late summer months, on 
balance. Residential builders and brokers indicated modest growth compared with year-ago levels; however, diminished 
lot and land inventory constrained builders’ ability to meet demand. Commercial real estate contacts reported strong 
demand. Manufacturers noted increases in new orders and production. 
Employment and Wages  
Business contacts reported that labor market growth in 
select regions was being restrained by firms’ inability to 
recruit staff, particularly among the low-skill/hourly work-
force. In response, firms shared plans to move to loca-
tions with larger labor pools, to change/reduce personnel 
standards and requirements, or continue to pursue auto-
mation to replace workers.     
Contacts continued to report that wage pressure was 
growing; however, increases greater than 2 to 3 percent 
remained targeted, rather than broad-based. In re-
sponse, firms continued to approach compensation 
creatively (e.g., offer enhanced flexibility, use bonuses 
and other incentive pay, and offer profit sharing or other 
forms of temporary compensation that can be discontin-
ued if necessary). Reports from some firms indicated 
that they were unable to pay the higher wages demand-
ed by experienced job seekers. Instead, they shifted 
their focus on higher margin business lines or planned to 
“wait it out” and not to fill the positions.       
Prices  
Businesses across the District continued to report some 
increases in nonlabor input costs, specifically relating to 
transportation and steel, noting slightly more ability to 
pass along these price increases than in the previous 
report. Anticipation of rising costs related to tariffs contin-
ued to contribute to vendor price increases for commodi-
ties. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations 
(BIE) survey showed year-over-year unit costs were up 
2.0 percent in August. Survey respondents indicated 
they expect unit costs to rise 2.1 percent over the next 
twelve months. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retail contacts reported growth in sales volume 
since the last report. Solid tourism activity was cited as 
benefiting retailers and heavily influencing sales activity 
in some markets. Retailers expect continued positive 
momentum for the remainder of the year. Automobile 
dealers reported an increase in year-over-year sales 
volume. 
On balance, District tourism and hospitality contacts 
reported a strong summer season compared to the same 
time last year. Summer was robust for Florida tourism 
activity as occupancy and average room rate surpassed 
expectations. However, August turned in some mixed 
results as West Coast beaches were negatively impact-
ed by the “red tide” algae bloom. New Orleans reported 
a decrease in July occupancy while the average daily 
rate was up, year-over-year. Preliminary August occu-
pancy reports for New Orleans were stronger than ex-
pected. The outlook for the fourth quarter is mixed; some 
markets expect softer tourism activity year-over-year 
while others expect growth.  
     
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
On balance, reports from District residential real estate 
contacts indicated modest but ongoing growth. Many 
builders reported that construction activity was up from 
the year-ago level. The lack of lot and land availability 
remained a constraint on building activity. Several con-
tacts stated that even if they had the developed land, 
construction labor market conditions would keep them 
from being able to meet current levels of housing de-
mand. District builders expect home sales activity to hold 
steady over the next few months. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts noted 
continued strong demand. The majority of commercial 
contractors indicated that on balance, the pace of non-
residential construction activity at least matched the year
-ago level, with the exception of retail construction, which 
was characterized as unchanged to down. Most contacts 
reported a healthy pipeline of activity, with backlogs 
greater than or equal to the previous year. Many con-
tacts expressed concerns that uncertainty over increas-
ing materials prices was making bidding and fulfilling 
projects more challenging. The outlook for nonresidential 
and multifamily construction among commercial contrac-
tors across the District remained positive, with the major-
ity anticipating activity to match or exceed the current 
level. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts reported strong overall business 
conditions from mid-July through August. Most firms 
cited increases in new orders and production. Supplier 
delivery times were said to be getting longer, while fin-
ished inventory levels remained elevated. Uncertainty 
regarding tariffs and trade policy continued to weigh 
heavily on manufacturers’ sentiment as expectations for 
future production levels decreased from the previous 
period. Slightly less than one-third of contacts are ex-
pecting higher production over the next six months. 
Transportation 
District transportation contacts noted increased activity 
during the reporting period. On a year-over-year basis, 
railroad traffic was up notably, primarily due to double-
digit increases in shipments of grain, petroleum and 
petroleum products, pulp and paper products, and iron 
and steel scrap. District ports cited substantial growth in 
container traffic, breakbulk, and dry bulk freight. Air 
cargo contacts noted that domestic activity was up due 
to increased e-commerce shipments; international cargo 
from Latin America was described as robust, but exports 
to Europe had softened. Transportation contacts noted 
no significant disruptions in the movement of freight as a 
result of changes in trade policy. 
Banking and Finance  
Earnings continued to improve for financial institutions, 
driven by a stronger net interest margin. Asset growth 
continued to slow due to lower demand for credit amid 
higher interest rates and savings from tax reform. Credit 
quality remained strong among most financial institutions 
although underwriting standards loosened for some 
credit products, particularly residential mortgages. Trans-
action accounts still comprised the majority of financial 
institutions’ funding, but borrowings were increasingly 
funding new loan growth. 
Energy  
Fuel refining capacity utilization continued at a record 
pace and crude production remained strong. Exports of 
petroleum products continued to rise. Contacts noted 
increasing activity offshore in the Gulf of Mexico, includ-
ing lease purchases for exploration spots. Utilities power 
generation projects picked up, particularly involving 
maintenance on power facilities. Utilities sector contacts 
continued to cite increases in the share of power genera-
tion from natural gas. Some contacts expressed concern 
that tariffs on steel and aluminum may influence the 
viability of planned industrial construction and plant 
expansion projects in Louisiana. 
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District continued to be 
mixed. Drought conditions were little changed from the 
previous report; most of the District remained drought 
free although there were reports of abnormally dry condi-
tions in much of Louisiana and in parts of Mississippi and 
Alabama. August production forecasts indicated year-
over-year increases in rice, soybean, and cotton, while 
peanut production was down. Year-over-year prices paid 
to farmers in June were up for corn, cotton, rice, soy-
beans, broilers, and eggs, while beef prices were down. 
However, since the last report, weekly comparisons 
indicated lower commodity cash prices for some recently 
tariffed agriculture exports such as soybeans, and the 
USDA has announced a financial relief program for 
affected agriculture producers.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District picked up to a moderate pace in July and early August, and contacts 
expected it to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Manufacturing production and employment grew 
moderately, consumer and business spending increased modestly, and construction and real estate activity was up 
slightly. Wages and prices rose modestly, and financial conditions improved slightly. Overall crop yields in the District 
appeared set to forge a new record. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth picked up to a moderate pace over 
the reporting period, though contacts expected gains to 
slow to a modest rate over the next 6 to 12 months. 
Hiring was focused on production, sales, and profession-
al and technical workers. As they have for some time, 
contacts indicated that the labor market was tight and 
that they had difficulty filling positions at all skill levels. 
Manufacturers continued to report that they had delayed 
or turned down projects because of difficulties in finding 
workers. There were also reports of firms forgoing layoffs 
to avoid the challenge of finding workers when demand 
picked up. A staffing firm that primarily supplies manu-
facturers with production workers reported no change in 
billable hours. Wage growth remained modest overall, 
with wage increases most likely to be reported for mana-
gerial, professional and technical, and production work-
ers. Most firms reported rising benefits costs. 
Prices 
Prices rose modestly in July and early August, and con-
tacts expected prices to continue to increase at that rate 
over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail prices increased 
slightly overall. Auto dealers noted that the steel and 
aluminum tariffs had not yet boosted retail prices for light 
vehicles, but expected them to do so eventually. Produc-
er prices rose moderately, reflecting in part the pass-
through of higher labor, materials, energy, and freight 
costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Nonauto retail sales rose modestly, with 
gains in the furniture, appliances, hardware, apparel, and 
grocery sectors. Contacts in tourism also reported in-
creased activity. New light vehicle sales, however, de-
creased slightly, while used light vehicle sales increased 
moderately.  
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in July and early 
August. Retail contacts indicated that inventories were 
generally at comfortable levels, though some auto deal-
ers reported that their inventories were too high. Most 
manufacturing contacts also said that stocks were at 
comfortable levels, though some indicated inventories 
were too low as a result of longer lead times for equip-
ment and materials (particularly steel products). In addi-
tion, steel service center inventories remained below 
historical norms. Capital spending increased modestly, 
and contacts expected growth to continue at that pace 
over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were primarily for 
replacing industrial and IT equipment and for renovating 
structures. Some contacts indicated that they were de-
laying capital spending decisions until 2019 because of 
uncertainty over the outcome of international trade nego-
tiations. Demand for energy from commercial and indus-
trial users increased modestly, with the strongest growth 
coming from data centers and steel producers. Demand 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
for transportation services increased moderately from an 
already high level. One contact noted that threats of new 
tariffs had led to spikes in freight traffic as businesses 
sought to move goods before the tariffs might take effect. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction was 
little changed, with growth in suburban single-family 
homebuilding offset by declines in other markets. Home-
builders reported that rising labor and materials costs 
were squeezing margins and leading them to focus on 
higher-margin higher-end homes in spite of strong de-
mand for starter homes. Home sales were up slightly 
overall, though a contact in the Detroit area reported 
slower sales. Contacts across the District indicated that 
low inventories of starter homes continued to hold back 
sales. Nonresidential construction edged higher from an 
already solid level, with contacts highlighting growth in 
the industrial, health, and education sectors. Commercial 
real estate activity increased modestly with growth 
spread across most segments. That said, one contact 
indicated that he had started seeing deals fall through 
because of increases in construction costs. Commercial 
rents increased slightly, vacancy rates edged down, and 
sublease space edged up. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased at a moderate rate 
in July and early August. Steel output increased moder-
ately as end-user demand remained at a high level and 
imports declined. Demand for heavy machinery rose 
moderately, helped by growing demand from the con-
struction and oil and gas sectors. Heavy truck demand 
continued to grow at a strong pace. Order books for 
specialty metals manufacturers increased modestly. 
Manufacturers of construction materials continued to 
report slow but steady increases in shipments, though 
there were concerns that the housing market is cooling. 
Auto production edged down, but remained at a solid 
level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved slightly over the reporting 
period. Financial market participants reported little 
change in securities prices or volatility. Business loan 
demand increased modestly, with growing demand from 
both small and middle-market firms. Contacts noted that 
competition for customers was particularly strong in the 
small business segment. Loans were primarily for financ-
ing real estate, capital equipment, and M&A. Loan quali-
ty was little changed on balance. Consumer loan de-
mand increased slightly, led by growth in auto and home 
loans. Consumer loan quality and lending standards 
were little changed. 
Agriculture 
Overall crop yields in the District appeared set to forge a 
new record as the result of widespread good weather. 
Contacts expected a record harvest for soybeans but not 
for corn, reflecting the shift in the composition of crops in 
this year’s plantings. The anticipation of large supplies 
and uncertainty about trade policy led to lower corn and 
soybean prices. Wheat prices were higher though, be-
cause of tighter world supplies. Specialty crops were 
generally in good shape. Hog prices were down, as 
tariffs led to a drop in exports. Dairy farmers continued to 
struggle as milk prices remained low, while egg produc-
ers benefitted from modestly higher prices. Contacts 
throughout the District continued to express concerns 
about the impact of trade disputes and tariffs on the 
agricultural industry, in spite of the favorable news on 
NAFTA negotiations and the announcement of govern-
ment assistance, which contacts largely viewed as inad-
equate. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have again improved slightly since our previous report. Firms indicated modest increases in em-
ployment despite continued difficulties finding workers. Wages and nonlabor costs increased modestly, and contacts 
reported modest growth in prices charged to consumers. Consumer spending activity improved slightly. Manufacturers 
reported no change in production but reported declines in capacity utilization and new orders. Residential real estate 
contacts noted that low inventories continue to limit sales. Construction activity increased modestly as contacts stated 
concerns over labor shortages and rising prices of building materials. District bankers reported little change in loan 
demand but expect an uptick in the fourth quarter. Agriculture conditions declined modestly, and local farmers ex-
pressed anxieties over low commodity prices. Overall, the outlook among contacts weakened slightly but remained 
optimistic. On net, 20 percent of contacts expect conditions for the rest of 2018 to be better relative to a year ago.    
Employment and Wages  
Employment has grown modestly since the previous 
report. On net, 25 percent of survey respondents indicat-
ed that employment was higher than a year ago. Con-
tacts reported shortages of qualified job candidates 
across a variety of sectors, including construction, trans-
portation, and healthcare. Organizations continued to 
undertake initiatives that attempt to address the current 
skills gap, such as firms forming partnerships with local 
high schools to prepare students for a technical career. 
Small business contacts highlighted the tight labor mar-
ket as their main challenge, citing difficulties matching 
compensation and benefits that larger employers offer. 
Wages have increased modestly since the previous 
report. On net, 40 percent of survey respondents indicat-
ed that wages were higher or slightly higher than a year 
ago, and 39 percent reported increases in labor costs. 
Contacts in construction and transportation reported that 
labor shortages have led to wage increases in those 
industries. Small business wages in St. Louis grew mod-
erately.      
Prices  
Prices have continued to increase modestly since the 
previous report. On net, 32 percent of business contacts 
reported that prices charged to consumers increased 
relative to a year ago, about the same share as three 
months prior.  
Nonlabor input costs also rose modestly. On net, 33 
percent of survey respondents indicated that costs were 
higher than the same time last year. Multiple manufactur-
ers reported facing elevated input prices linked to steel 
and aluminum tariffs as well as increased freight costs. 
Many of these contacts indicated they have passed or 
intend to pass along these costs to their customers. 
Agricultural food prices have shown slight to modest 
growth across the District since the previous report, yet 
remained depressed. The price movements of other 
commodities were mixed. Steel prices have declined 
slightly since mid-July but remain elevated compared 
with a year ago. Coal prices were unchanged.     
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate that consumer spending has slightly in-
creased since our previous report. Real sales tax collec-
tions increased in Missouri, Arkansas, Tennessee, and 
Kentucky relative to a year ago. Retailers from northeast 
Arkansas reported year-to-date sales well above 2017 
levels, and they expressed a positive outlook for the 
remainder of the year. Reports from auto dealers were 
mixed: Some contacts indicated that sales were higher 
than anticipated while others reported that sales failed to 
meet expectations. Multiple dealers noted that higher 
interest rates have posed a challenge to their business. 
Hospitality contacts in Missouri reported that sales ex-
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
ceeded expectations, and they continued to express a 
positive outlook for the coming months.     
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has been mixed since our previ-
ous report. District contacts, on net, indicated that new 
orders and capacity utilization decreased in the third 
quarter relative to one year ago while production re-
mained unchanged. However, survey-based indexes 
suggested that Arkansas and Missouri manufacturing 
activity continued to expand from June to July, and sur-
vey respondents expressed an optimistic outlook for the 
fourth quarter. Several companies reported new capital 
expenditure and facility expansion plans, including firms 
that manufacture auto parts, food and beverage prod-
ucts, and medical devices.     
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the services sector has improved slightly since 
the previous report. On net, 37 percent of survey re-
spondents indicated dollar sales in the current quarter 
increased relative to a year ago, and 32 percent expect 
next quarter’s sales to be higher as well. The number of 
posted vacancies for nonfinancial services occupations 
in July increased moderately across Louisville, Memphis, 
and St. Louis. Transportation and logistics activity has 
slightly improved and firms expanded investment within 
the District. Local contacts continued to report a short-
age of truck drivers. A Kentucky rail transporter voiced 
concerns that tariffs may reduce demand in the upcom-
ing grain season.     
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has increased slightly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for July were modestly above prior-month levels 
across the District’s four largest MSAs. Local contacts 
indicated that inventory shortages continued to hinder 
sales, but they expect inventory levels to improve in the 
fourth quarter.  
Residential construction activity improved modestly. 
June permit activity within District MSAs was slightly 
higher relative to the previous month, and about 40 
percent of survey respondents, on net, indicated that 
they expected residential construction to increase in the 
next quarter. Local contacts continued to report con-
straints caused by a shortage of skilled workers and 
rising prices of building materials. 
Commercial real estate activity has improved modestly 
since the previous report. Contacts noted increased 
demand for most property types compared with a year 
ago. They expect these trends to continue into the final 
quarter of 2018.  
Commercial construction activity improved slightly. Sur-
vey respondents indicated healthy demand for most 
property types. Contacts in Memphis and Little Rock 
noted that hotel construction activity remained robust.      
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have remained stable 
since the previous report. Loan demand in each major 
lending category was little changed relative to year-ago 
levels, but bankers, on net, expect stronger demand in 
the fourth quarter. While overall delinquencies de-
creased only slightly on a year-over-year basis, credit 
card delinquencies declined dramatically. On the other 
hand, commercial and industrial loan delinquencies are 
expected to increase slightly next quarter. Lending 
standards for such loans rose sharply and are expected 
to continue tightening through the remainder of 2018. A 
large share of District bankers reported strong gains in 
banking sector employment, as well as new branch 
openings and expanded market areas served.     
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have deteriorated since the 
previous report. Compared with late June, the percent-
ages of corn and soybeans rated fair or better declined 
moderately, while those for cotton and rice increased 
modestly. Relative to the previous year, however, the 
percentage of District rice rated fair or better was mod-
estly higher, while corn and cotton was unchanged. The 
percent of soybeans rated fair or better was modestly 
below its August 2017 value. Farmers continued to ex-
press concerns over low agricultural commodity prices 
resulting from the trade dispute between China and the 
United States. Contacts in Missouri and Indiana indicat-
ed that farmers did not lock-in pre-tariff pricing for a 
majority of their soybean crop, leaving them exposed to 
current market conditions.  
Natural resource extraction conditions rose slightly from 
June to July, with seasonally adjusted coal production 
increasing 0.6 percent. July production was 4.1 percent 
higher than a year ago. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity expanded moderately since the last report. Employment grew strongly, with robust hiring 
demand despite continued labor constraints. Wage growth was moderate to strong and price pressures were moderate 
since the previous report. The District economy showed growth in consumer spending, tourism, services, manufactur-
ing, residential real estate, commercial real estate, mining, and tourism. Commercial and residential construction were 
mixed, while agriculture remained weak overall.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew strongly since the last report despite 
continued labor constraints. Hiring demand was robust. 
The number of July job postings at state workforce 
centers grew strongly across the District compared with 
a year earlier, with several states posting low double-
digit growth. In Minnesota, the number of July openings 
in high-tech fields rose from a year earlier. Two separate 
July surveys reported solid hiring sentiment in the 
Dakotas and Minnesota. Staffing industry contacts 
reported growth in clients and total job orders. However, 
finding labor was much more difficult. Over the most 
recent six-week period (through mid-August), both initial 
and continuing unemployment claims fell by about 11 
percent across District states. Staffing clients widely 
reported more unfilled job openings compared with the 
same period a year earlier. A contact with offices in 
Minnesota and Wisconsin said that there were “not 
nearly enough candidates” for available openings. A 
North Dakota contact said an “overwhelming” majority of 
staffing clients were optimistic about current business 
conditions: “Companies are expanding or want to 
expand. Their challenge is finding enough workers.” 
Even major layoffs had an offset. A financial call center 
in South Dakota announced layoffs of about 450 
workers. But a Minnesota call center expected to hire 
550 workers thanks to higher demand from travel and 
health care clients.  
Wage growth was moderate to strong since the last 
report. An ad hoc survey of Minnesota staffing firms 
found average wage growth of 3 percent to 5 percent, 
with similar expectations for the coming year. A western 
Wisconsin contact said lower-paying positions were 
seeing catch-up wage increases, “while the top (wage) 
stays in place.” Increasing entry-level wages from $11 to 
$13 “hasn’t had much of an impact in recruiting, but 
moving to over $15 has.” A North Dakota contact said 
wages for entry-level office jobs have risen from $12 to 
$14 over the past year, while those for entry-level forklift 
operators have gone from $14 to $16 or more. Due to 
high vacancies, salaries for high-tech positions in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul were seeing strong increases.    
Prices  
Price pressures increased moderately relative to the 
previous report. Retail food and beverage prices 
accelerated modestly from a year ago, according to 
industry sources. Construction costs continued to 
increase briskly, due both to rising materials prices and 
high demand for subcontractors. Transportation logistics 
costs have increased substantially this year, according to 
contacts. A July survey of purchasing managers 
indicated elevated inflation expectations. Retail fuel 
prices as of late August were generally unchanged 
relative to the previous report. Prices received by 
farmers for wheat, hay, chickens, and eggs increased in 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
July compared with a year earlier; prices for corn, 
soybeans, hogs, cattle, milk, and turkeys decreased.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending rose moderately since the last 
report. Available sales and tax data showed higher 
summer receipts in Minnesota, South Dakota, and 
Wisconsin compared with a year earlier. A Minnesota 
consumer goods retailer reported strong financial results 
in its most recent quarter, and a Minnesota-based 
furniture retailer announced a major expansion of stores. 
The Minnesota lodging industry experienced a 2 percent 
increase in overall demand over last July. Total airline 
passenger traffic in Minneapolis-St. Paul in July was flat 
compared with a year earlier, but was solidly higher at 
other, smaller airports across the District.  
Tourism saw moderate growth across District states. 
Traffic at the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally in August 
was 8 percent higher than a year earlier. However, July 
gaming receipts in South Dakota fell slightly. Extremely 
hot weather reportedly led to an attendance drop at the 
Montana State Fair, but total revenue was nonetheless 
strong. The summer music and festival season in Billings 
and Bozeman (Mont.) were reportedly very strong in 
terms of attendance and spending. The North Dakota 
State Fair fell just short of setting an all-time attendance 
record. Following two months of increased traffic, July 
traffic across the Mackinac Bridge leading to Michigan’s 
Upper Peninsula was flat compared with a year earlier.    
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. An electronics 
distributor broke ground on a $300 million expansion. 
Demand for agricultural data analytics has increased this 
year as farmers seek to economize on input costs, 
according to a contact. Freight demand was up, 
particularly in trucking. Great Lakes cargo shipments 
increased 2.5 percent in July from a year earlier.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was mixed since the last 
report. Industry data suggested that commercial 
construction was down steeply in July. However, 
spending in the heavy construction sector was higher as 
crews took advantage of dry summer weather. 
Commercial permitting in July—a signal of future 
activity—was also higher in many of the District’s larger 
cities, including Minneapolis; Billings; and Bismarck, 
N.D. Residential construction was mixed. Limited data 
on August permitting suggested that activity increased 
compared with a year earlier, including in Minneapolis-
St. Paul. However more extensive July permit data 
showed mostly flat-to-lower activity across the District. A 
Montana contact said market-rate apartments were 
seeing strong growth in larger markets, which was 
expected to continue into next year. Minneapolis-St. Paul 
saw a considerable increase in August multi-family units 
permitted compared with last year, following an equally 
notable decrease in July.  
Commercial real estate saw modest growth since the 
last report. Office vacancy and lease pricing were stable 
in Minneapolis-St. Paul. Industrial leasing in the region 
reportedly slowed compared with last year, due to lack of 
suitable space; industrial vacancy rates have tightened 
and space under construction has risen in response. 
However, closures continued among large retail stores, 
including two mall anchors in western Wisconsin. 
Residential real estate activity rose modestly. Closed 
sales were higher overall in Montana’s larger cities 
compared with a year earlier; they also rose modestly in 
Sioux Falls, S.D. While July sales were flat in Minnesota, 
those across northern Wisconsin were the strongest in at 
least a dozen years, and sales also rose in the western 
area of the state. Low inventories of homes saw some 
improvement, increasing by 4 percent in both 
Minneapolis-St. Paul and Sioux Falls.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately. An 
index of manufacturing conditions indicated increased 
activity in July compared with a month earlier in 
Minnesota and the Dakotas. A solar panel producer was 
preparing to re-open a shuttered plant in Minnesota. An 
HVAC manufacturer and a producer of radiators for 
heavy equipment announced expansions at existing 
facilities. Contacts from across the sector continued to 
report negative impacts from trade restrictions.     
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
The District agricultural sector was weak overall. 
Growing conditions in much of the District were good this 
summer, with producers in some areas expecting record 
yields. However, low commodity prices continued to drag 
on farm finances and contacts remained concerned 
about trade conflicts. District oil and gas exploration 
activity as of late August decreased slightly from the 
previous report. Coal production in Montana increased 
from a year earlier. District iron ore mines were operating 
at capacity, with work underway to bring an idled facility 
back online; iron ore shipments on the Great Lakes were 
up 7 percent in July from a year earlier.   ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased modestly in late July and August, and growth was expected to continue 
in most sectors. Consumer spending increased slightly since the previous survey period, including gains in retail, auto, 
restaurant and tourism sales. Manufacturing activity expanded moderately, and respondents in transportation, whole-
sale trade, professional, and high-tech firms reported higher sales. Residential real estate conditions declined slightly, 
due in part to seasonal effects and higher interest rates, while commercial real estate activity rose modestly. Energy 
activity across the District held steady, although oil and gas production continued to rise. Agricultural conditions deterio-
rated further in the District, leading to stronger demand for farm loans and a slight worsening of loan repayment prob-
lems. Growth in employment and employee hours varied across sectors, and the majority of respondents continued to 
report labor shortages and higher wages. Input prices and selling prices rose in most sectors, and additional price gains 
were expected in the months ahead.  
Employment and Wages  
Growth in District employment and employee hours 
varied across sectors since the previous survey, alt-
hough most respondents expected gains in the months 
ahead. Contacts in the retail trade, wholesale trade, 
transportation, restaurant and manufacturing sectors 
noted rising employment levels. However, respondents 
in auto sales, professional services, tourism, and health 
services reported a decline in both employment and 
employee hours. Employment and employee hours were 
expected to increase in the next few months in every 
sector except tourism. 
A majority of respondents reported labor shortages for 
low- and medium-skill workers, due primarily to a lack of 
qualified applicants. Contacts specifically noted difficul-
ties filling commercial driving positions and most posi-
tions within the retail and food-services sectors. Wages 
rose modestly in most sectors, and moderate wage 
growth was expected in the coming months.   
Prices  
Input and selling prices rose in most sectors in late July 
and August, and additional increases were anticipated 
moving forward. Selling prices in the retail sector in-
creased moderately compared to the previous survey 
period, while input prices rose robustly. Restaurant 
contacts reported a slight increase in both input and 
selling prices and anticipated a faster pace of price gains 
in the months ahead. Input prices in the transportation 
sector rose moderately, and selling prices edged up. 
Respondents in the transportation sector projected 
strong gains in input prices moving forward. After moder-
ate gains earlier this year, prices in the construction 
sector held steady and remained moderately above year
-ago levels. Manufacturers reported a slight increase in 
prices for both finished products and raw materials since 
the previous survey, and a large share of District manu-
facturing contacts reported that trade developments this 
year had led to higher input prices.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending grew slightly compared to the previ-
ous survey period, with gains in retail, auto, restaurant 
and tourism sales. Retail sales and inventories edged up 
in late July and August and remained well above year-
ago levels. Retail contacts anticipated overall activity to 
increase in the months ahead. Auto sales rose modestly 
compared to the previous survey period, and expecta-
tions were for strong growth moving forward. Auto con-
tacts noted used vehicles and new sport utility vehicles 
sold well, although most other new vehicles sold poorly. 
Restaurant sales increased modestly compared to both 
the previous survey period and year-ago levels, and 
respondents anticipated growth to continue but at a 
slightly slower pace in the next few months. Tourism 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
sales expanded at a slight pace but were expected to 
decrease modestly in the near term. Capital spending 
plans strengthened within all consumer spending sub-
sectors with the exception of tourism.   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace 
compared to the previous survey period, and the majority 
of other business contacts experienced slight-to-
moderate sales growth. Factory activity grew moderately 
at both durable and nondurable plants. The level of 
production, shipments, and new orders also rose moder-
ately over the survey period and remained higher than a 
year ago. Although manufacturers' capital expenditures 
continued to expand moderately, several contacts report-
ed that recent trade developments had lowered capital 
spending plans. 
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the wholesale trade 
and transportation sectors noted moderate sales growth, 
whereas contacts in the professional and high-tech 
sector reported slight growth. A majority of business 
contacts  anticipated moderate sales gains going for-
ward. Transportation contacts expected a modest in-
crease in capital spending in the coming months, while 
professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade firms pro-
jected moderate growth in capital expenditures.  
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity was mixed, with residential 
real estate activity declining slightly and commercial real 
estate activity rising modestly. Residential home sales 
fell moderately in late July and August and were similar 
to year-ago levels. Contacts expected further decreases 
in residential sales, citing seasonal factors and rising 
interest rates. Sales of low- and medium-priced homes 
continued to outpace sales of higher-priced homes, and 
home prices fell modestly. Residential construction activ-
ity rose slightly, and unsold home inventories experi-
enced modest growth. Commercial real estate activity 
expanded at a modest pace as sales, absorption, com-
pletions, construction underway, and prices rose; vacan-
cy rates decreased slightly. Expectations in the commer-
cial real estate sector were for modest gains moving 
forward.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
Banking 
Bankers reported a slight increase in overall loan de-
mand in late July and August. Demand rose slightly for 
commercial and industrial loans and for commercial real 
estate loans. Respondents indicated a slight decrease 
for residential real estate and consumer installment 
loans, while agricultural loans held steady. Loan quality 
improved modestly compared to a year ago, and re-
spondents expect loan quality to remain steady over the 
next six months. Credit standards remained largely 
unchanged in all major loan categories, and bankers 
reported a modest decrease in deposit levels.   
Energy 
District energy activity remained steady since the last 
survey period, and contacts expected gains in the 
months ahead. The number of active oil rigs was un-
changed, while the number of active gas rigs moderated 
slightly. Oil and gas production continued to expand, and 
contacts expected solid production increases moving 
forward. Oil prices were slightly lower than the peak 
levels reached earlier in the summer, but remained 
higher than levels in recent years.  
Agriculture 
Farm income and credit conditions in the Tenth District 
weakened, and crop prices remained relatively steady 
following sharp declines in June and early July. The 
price of corn and soybeans increased modestly in late 
July, but declined in August to a level similar to the previ-
ous reporting period. With agricultural commodity prices 
generally lower than a year ago, District contacts report-
ed a decrease in farm income in addition to stronger 
demand for farm loans. Loan repayment problems also 
worsened slightly throughout the District and were most 
significant in Nebraska, Colorado, Wyoming and New 
Mexico. District contacts reported that uncertainty sur-
rounding trade was a primary concern, and the pro-
longed weaknesses in the agricultural economy were 
increasingly impacting farm borrower finances. Although 
interest rates on farm loans continued to increase along-
side weakening agricultural credit conditions, farmland 
values declined only modestly.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Solid expansion continued in the Eleventh District economy, although the pace eased slightly compared with the last 
report. Manufacturing output increased, and loan demand and retail spending accelerated. Broad-based expansion in 
the service sector continued. Home sales slowed, and drilling activity was flat. The ongoing drought dampened crop and 
grazing conditions. Employment increased, and widespread labor shortages continued to pressure wages. Price pres-
sures stayed elevated largely due to increases in input costs. Although outlooks remained fairly optimistic, trade-related 
concerns have heightened uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages  
Job growth continued to be widespread across sectors. 
Labor shortages persisted, covering a wide range of 
industries and skill sets, and several contacts said that a 
lack of qualified candidates was constraining growth. 
Poaching of skilled labor in midstream construction was 
reported, and a staffing firm said they had cancelled 
retainer contracts with some customers in order to recruit 
those firms’ employees for active clients. 
Wage pressures remained elevated, with more than 60 
percent of firms saying they were increasing wages and/
or benefits to recruit and retain employees. Upstream 
energy firms reported significant pressure to raise wages 
in the Permian Basin despite flattening of the rig count, 
and midstream and downstream energy companies also 
cited rising wage pressures, particularly for personnel 
with less than five years of experience. A transportation 
services firm was offering up to $15,000 in multi-year 
sign-on bonuses in some areas. Retailers noted difficulty 
filling lower-level positions, with several contacts report-
ing starting wages of $15-$16 per hour to remain com-
petitive. Nearly 60 percent of firms said they were unable 
to pass higher labor costs to customers through price 
increases.  
Prices 
Price pressures remained elevated in part due to tariffs, 
although they did ease slightly over the reporting period 
in manufacturing and retail. Price pressures were little 
changed in the service sector. Firms’ ability to pass on 
higher costs to customers was limited, although a few 
did mention plans to raise prices in the near term. Fuel 
prices were flat over the reporting period. The price of 
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil remained in the 
high $60s; however, prices received by some producers 
were reportedly $10-$17 lower due to limited pipeline 
capacity. 
Manufacturing  
Robust expansion continued in the manufacturing sector. 
Output growth strengthened for durables, led by a pickup 
in fabricated metals and in computer and electronic 
product manufacturing. Machinery production remained 
solid, while demand for primary metals and transporta-
tion equipment manufacturing was flat. Among nondura-
bles, food and chemical production increased. The Gulf 
Coast refinery utilization rate climbed further to 99.4 
percent in mid-August. Relatively low domestic feed 
costs and expectations of healthy global demand boost-
ed refiners’ and chemical producers’ outlooks. Overall, 
outlooks among manufacturers remained positive, alt-
hough tariffs have increased uncertainty in expectations. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales accelerated during the reporting period. 
Online sales remained solid, and seasonal retailers 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
noted a marked increase in activity. A clothing retailer 
said sales along the border were trailing other areas. 
Auto sales strengthened in August following weakness in 
July. While outlooks stayed positive, concern over tariffs 
and rising interest rates was noted. 
Nonfinancial Services 
The nonfinancial services sector expanded broadly, with 
revenue growth firming up among healthcare, real estate 
and leasing services, and administrative and support 
services firms. Staffing services firms said high levels of 
demand were sustained by broad-based growth across 
geographies and industries. Activity in the transportation 
services sector remained markedly strong, with rail traffic 
solid across nearly all business lines and continued 
robust growth in container volumes. Courier cargo vol-
umes rose year over year. Airline passenger demand 
remained stable, and continued strength was expected 
in most markets. Revenue growth was moderate in the 
professional and business services and the leisure and 
hospitality sectors. Expectations regarding future busi-
ness conditions stayed optimistic, although higher fuel 
prices, labor shortages, and uncertainty surrounding 
trade policies remained sources of concern. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market softened over the reporting 
period, with most contacts noting slower-than-expected 
new-home sales. Existing-home sales were flat but 
remained near recent highs. Apart from the seasonal 
slowing, contacts said the recent heat wave, rising inter-
est rates, and lower creditworthiness of entry-level buy-
ers were affecting overall sales. Buyers remained price 
sensitive, and builders’ noted compressed margins at the 
higher price points, as well as discounting on speculative 
inventory homes in some locations. Contacts expressed 
trepidation about the impact of higher interest rates, 
rising building costs, and uncertainty surrounding trade 
and immigration policies on future sales, and some 
added that they expect starts to flatten out in the near 
term.  
A large number of new apartments continued to sup-
press rent growth in most major metros. Net absorption 
of office space moderated in Dallas–Fort Worth and 
remained weak in Houston in part due to the broader 
national trend among firms to move out of larger spaces 
into more efficient, smaller ones.  
Financial Services 
Loan volumes and demand expanded at a faster pace. 
Growth remained broad based, with continued strength 
in commercial and residential real estate lending and a 
notable pickup in commercial and industrial loan vol-
umes. Consumer loan growth slowed. Loan pricing rose 
further, albeit at a slower rate. The volume of core de-
posits expanded, and bankers noted an increase in the 
cost of funds and continued pressure to raise deposit 
rates. Contacts remained optimistic, although they cited 
flattening of the yield curve, tariffs, and regulatory com-
pliance as top concerns. 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District leveled off as 
pipeline capacity constraints put downward pressure on 
prices received by oil and gas operators in the Permian 
Basin relative to major oil benchmarks like WTI. The 
smaller independent companies are being hurt by the 
lower wellhead prices, which are near or below their 
breakeven levels; however, so far the discounts are not 
deep enough to shut in production. In contrast, margins 
have improved for oilfield services firms that were able to 
increase prices earlier in the year. Outlooks remained 
positive as additional pipeline capacity is expected to be 
operational in 2019. 
Agriculture 
Lack of soil moisture continued to dampen agricultural 
conditions in Texas, with more than half the state experi-
encing drought. The corn and soybean crops were gen-
erally in fair to good condition, while pastures and the 
cotton and sorghum crops were mostly in fair to poor 
condition. Texas crop production this year is expected to 
be down 27-33 percent from 2017, depending on the 
crop, according to USDA estimates. There is also con-
cern among the agricultural community about tariffs and 
trade wars. However, a potential bright spot for Texas 
agricultural producers is the high probability for an El 
Nino climate pattern this winter, which could mean cooler 
and wetter weather for the state. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of July 
through August. Conditions in the labor market tightened further, and wage pressures ticked up. Price inflation in-
creased moderately. Sales of retail goods picked up moderately, while activity in consumer and business services 
edged down slightly. Activity in the manufacturing sector and conditions in agriculture improved modestly. Contacts 
reported that residential real estate market activity expanded at a solid pace, and activity in the commercial real estate 
sector was healthy. Lending activity ticked up modestly. 
 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market tightened further, with 
contacts across a variety of sectors reporting labor short-
ages. A national clothing retailer based in Seattle report-
ed that hiring at warehouse fulfillment centers was con-
strained by a lack of qualified job candidates. Truck 
drivers continued to be in short supply. Continued labor 
shortages in construction contributed to some project 
delays. A steel manufacturer in Oregon noted that hiring 
picked up modestly due to an increase in demand. A 
print media company in Eastern Washington reported 
minimal net changes in employment, with gains due to 
business growth offset by reductions due to automation. 
Wage growth ticked up broadly, and some businesses 
increased benefits in response to more labor retention 
challenges. Contacts across the District noted upward 
compensation pressures for accountants, software engi-
neers, and information technology professionals. In the 
Mountain West, small businesses moderately raised 
starting wages and benefit compensation to better com-
pete with larger national employers. In order to retain 
employees and attract new hires, a few businesses 
increasingly offered flexible work arrangements.  
Prices  
Price inflation increased moderately over the reporting 
period. On balance, pricing pressures for building materi-
als continued to rise noticeably across the District. Con-
tacts noted a moderate pickup in price growth for metal 
inputs and for finished steel. A contact in the electric 
utility industry of Southern California observed a jump in 
prices for metals used in the construction of electricity 
infrastructure. An industry contact in Oregon noted that 
the price of steel continued to increase, due in part to the 
implementation of tariffs and to unrelated declines in 
global competition. Higher fuel costs gave a slight boost 
to shipping and freight costs in various sectors. A few 
lumber producers in the Pacific Northwest reported a 
moderate decline in selling prices due to overproduction 
and a tick down in housing starts.   
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods picked up moderately over the 
reporting period. Major global retailers based in Oregon 
and Washington reported that consumer demand for 
apparel picked up, which reduced reliance on discount 
pricing to stimulate sales. These businesses also noted 
that inventory levels were sufficient to meet continued 
elevated demand. Contacts in the Mountain West report-
ed that small retailers in particular saw a jump in sales, 
while auto sales in the region ticked down.   
Overall, activity in the consumer and business services 
sectors edged down slightly. A reduction in government 
reimbursements and an increase in labor and other input 
The Beige Book ■ August 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
costs put downward pressure on health-care providers’ 
bottom lines. Activity at transportation businesses contin-
ued to be slightly constrained due to shortages of truck 
drivers. Restaurant sales grew moderately in the Moun-
tain West. In Hawaii, contacts reported that activity in the 
tourism industry expanded solidly, limited only by recent 
weather-related disruptions.      
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector expanded modestly. 
Capacity utilization at steel producers increased slightly 
on a year-over-year basis due to solid domestic demand 
and reduced competition from overseas. A contact in 
Northern California noted modest sales growth in the 
semiconductor industry, with inventory and capacity 
utilization levels consistent with expectations for growth. 
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector improved modestly, 
though contacts noted a somewhat weakened outlook 
due to heightened trade tensions. In the Mountain West 
and California, crop yields were higher than expected 
due to better weather. Contacts in the Pacific Northwest 
reported that lumber production was solid, while demand 
for lumber for residential construction projects fell slight-
ly. Lumber exporters in the Pacific Northwest noted a 
modest decline in demand from China after that country 
announced tariffs on American lumber. Profitability at 
pork and beef producers fell moderately on a year-over-
year basis. With profit margins for many crops at only 
breakeven levels, agriculture contacts are keenly fo-
cused on the potential for prolonged trade-related disrup-
tions.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets expanded at a solid pace. 
Low inventory levels in the residential market persisted 
due to labor shortages and rising overall material costs, 
which constrained otherwise robust construction activity. 
Contacts across the District noted that the low levels of 
inventory in tandem with brisk demand for housing re-
sulted in continued upward pressures on home prices 
and rents. A contact in eastern Oregon observed that 
new buyers from regions with higher home prices drove 
a jump in demand. On balance, contacts did not observe 
a tangible impact on demand from the increase in mort-
gage rates. 
Commercial real estate activity was healthy. In line with 
the residential market, construction in the commercial 
market was limited only by labor shortages and rising 
material costs. In Oregon, leasing demand for retail and 
warehouse spaces picked up further, due in part to the 
growing cannabis industry. A contact in Southern Califor-
nia noted that commercial leasing rates jumped, spurring 
some additional construction starts.   
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked up modestly over the reporting 
period. Loan demand increased overall, with consumer 
loan growth slightly outpacing commercial loan growth. 
Net interest margins remained solid, despite some re-
cent narrowing due to rising deposit interest rates. Con-
tacts reported strong credit quality and loan perfor-
mance, though in the Mountain West, lenders remained 
attentive to decreasing profitability in segments of that 
region’s agriculture industry. ■ 


