The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
March 7, 2018 
February 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
based on information collected on or before February 26, 2018. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded at a modest to moderate pace across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts in January and 
February. Consumer spending was mixed, as non-auto retail sales increased in just over half of the Districts while auto 
sales declined or were flat in every District. Tourism activity was broadly solid, with Atlanta and Richmond recording 
robust growth in this sector. On balance, Districts reported modest growth in home sales and construction, with the 
latter constrained by shortages of labor and materials. Conditions in the nonresidential real estate market improved 
moderately since the previous report, with robust construction activity noted in three Districts. Commercial rents in and 
around New York City were up significantly, according to contacts in the area. Increases in production were broad 
based across manufacturing sectors, with all but one District noting at least modest growth in activity. Loan volumes 
were generally flat, with a handful of Districts noting a modest decrease in delinquency rates. Among reporting Dis-
tricts, agricultural sector activity was mixed but flat overall. Contacts in natural resource sectors saw modestly improv-
ing industry conditions, except in the Minneapolis District, where energy and mining activity was robust. 
Employment and Wages 
On balance, employment grew at a moderate pace since the previous report. Across the country, contacts observed 
persistent labor market tightness and brisk demand for qualified workers, as well as increased activity at staffing place-
ment services. Several Districts reported continued worker shortages across most sectors, with contacts often mention-
ing shortages in the construction, information technology, and manufacturing sectors. In many Districts, wage growth 
picked up to a moderate pace. Most Districts saw employers raise wages and expand benefit packages in response to 
tight labor market conditions. Contacts in a few Districts conveyed reports of modest increases in compensation follow-
ing passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. 
Prices 
Prices increased in all Districts, and most reports noted moderate inflation. Four Districts saw a marked increase in 
steel prices, due in part to a decline in foreign competition. Price growth for building materials such as lumber picked 
up, stemming from an uptick in construction activity. Several Districts reported moderate increases in broad transporta-
tion costs, caused primarily by higher fuel costs that boosted freight rates. Home and commercial lease prices rose 
across most of the country. 
 
Boston 
Business contacts at manufacturing and retail firms 
reported year-over-year revenue increases in recent 
weeks. These employers and staffing firms said labor 
markets were tight, and many cited potential wage in-
creases. Price commentary was mixed, although no 
contacts planned substantial price increases. The out-
look remained positive. 
 
New York 
Economic activity grew at a modest pace, while labor 
markets have remained tight. Input price pressures have 
intensified, while selling prices generally continued to 
rise modestly. Housing markets and commercial real 
estate markets have been mixed. 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to grow at a modest pace, in 
particular for nonauto retail sales, manufacturing, nonfi-
nancial services, and tourism. Nonresidential leasing 
improved to a modest pace, while auto sales continued a 
modest decline. Construction and existing home sales 
changed little. On balance, employment, wages, and 
prices continued to grow modestly.  
Cleveland 
The District economy expanded at a moderate pace. 
Labor markets tightened, with wage pressures noted 
broadly. The Tax Cut and Jobs Act is reportedly enabling 
firms to invest more and to increase worker pay. Strong-
er confidence in the economy supported rising demand 
in manufacturing, retail, and nonfinancial services. Con-
struction activity remained buoyant. 
Richmond 
The regional economy expanded at moderate pace in 
recent weeks. Manufacturing activity picked up, but 
manufacturers faced longer vendor lead times due to 
trucking delays. Exporting activity rose more quickly and, 
for some ports, came more in line with imports. Labor 
demand increased moderately and wage pressures 
broadened. Prices continued to grow at a modest pace. 
Atlanta 
Economic conditions continued to improve modestly. 
The labor market remained tight and wage growth was 
balanced. Non-labor input costs edged up slightly. Re-
tailers cited flat sales, while auto sales were sluggish. 
Home prices increased modestly. Demand for commer-
cial real estate continued to improve. Manufacturers 
noted solid activity and steady production levels. 
Chicago 
Growth in economic activity remained at a moderate 
pace. Employment and manufacturing production in-
creased moderately, business spending rose modestly, 
construction and real estate activity grew slightly, and 
consumer spending was down slightly. Wages increased 
modestly, prices rose slightly, and financial conditions 
deteriorated some. Farmers continued to face challeng-
ing conditions. 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have continued to improve at a 
modest pace. District banking contacts reported stronger 
demand for new loans. Overall price pressures strength-
ened. The outlook among firms surveyed in mid-
February was slightly more optimistic than the outlook in 
our mid-November survey and generally unchanged 
from one year ago. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew moderately, and 
labor markets remained tight. Consumer spending was 
up modestly, while tourism got a boost from the Super 
Bowl in Minneapolis and good snowfall elsewhere. Ener-
gy and mining activity increased briskly. Commercial 
construction grew strongly, but residential construction 
was mixed. Home sales were generally lower across the 
District. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest pace 
in late January and February, with broad-based growth 
across most District sectors. Consumer spending, real 
estate and energy activity increased modestly, while 
contacts in the manufacturing, transportation, wholesale 
trade, and professional and high-tech sectors reported 
moderate growth. Additional gains were expected in 
most sectors in the months ahead. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately, with sectors like 
manufacturing and energy continuing their solid expan-
sions while others cooled somewhat. Growth in nonfi-
nancial services activity slowed slightly, as did loan 
growth, and retail sales fell modestly. Hiring remained 
solid despite a tight labor market, and wage and price 
pressures remained elevated and in some cases 
strengthened. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Sales of retail goods picked 
up slightly, and growth in the consumer and business 
services sectors remained strong. Conditions in the 
manufacturing sector continued to pick up. Activity in 
residential real estate markets remained strong, and 
conditions in the commercial real estate sector were 
robust. Lending activity ticked up. 
 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the First District, with almost all retail and manufacturing respond-
ents citing sales and revenues in recent weeks ahead of year-earlier levels. By contrast, staffing firms reported year-
over-year revenue declines, reflecting ongoing difficulty finding workers to fill openings. Commercial real estate contacts 
offered generally upbeat reports. Residential real estate markets in the region saw sales declines and price increases, 
which respondents attributed to very low inventories. Outlooks continued to be generally positive. 
Employment and Wages  
Most responding firms said labor markets were tight. 
Retail contacts noted increased difficulty hiring workers 
in some categories and said they expected the labor 
market to tighten further over the coming year. Merit 
raises for existing retail employees were in the range of 
2.5 percent to 4.0 percent. One large retailer planned to 
pass along half its savings from the corporate tax cut to 
selected workers in the form of higher wages, while a 
smaller retailer said it planned to raise salaries a bit to 
match the wage increases announced by some promi-
nent retail chains as a result of the tax cuts. A manufac-
turing contact with declining sales laid off temporary 
workers but has, so far, avoided any layoffs of perma-
nent workers. Otherwise, no manufacturing respondents 
reported any major revisions to their hiring, although 
several said the market was particularly tight for skilled 
workers from machinists to electrical engineers. Manu-
facturing contacts reported higher starting salaries and 
longer waits to fill open positions. Staffing firms noted 
high labor demand from clients across the board, regard-
less of industry or occupation, paired with a dearth of 
candidates to fill open slots. They reported that bill rates 
and pay rates have risen, with some noting local mini-
mum wage increases as a source of upward movement. 
Prices  
Firms’ comments on pricing were mixed. Retail contacts 
said wholesale prices were steady; one indicated they 
will increase prices on most retail products by low single-
digits in 2018, while another planned to raise retail prices 
to cover higher labor costs. Another retail contact noted 
higher shipping costs because of a shortage of trucks 
and drivers. In manufacturing, specific supply issues 
have resulted in selective price increases. Otherwise, 
manufacturing contacts reported no notable changes in 
the pricing environment.  
Retail and Tourism 
First District retail respondents reported that from early 
January through mid-February, year-over-year sales 
results were positive, ranging from mid-single-digit to 
double-digit increases. While two contacts cited high 
demand for winter items, others believed the increases 
represented a continuation of more buoyant consumer 
sentiment that took hold in the second half of 2017.  
Contacts said the US economy is expected to do well 
overall in 2018, notwithstanding challenges facing some 
retailers. Predictions regarding consumer sentiment 
varied: One contact said that the cut in federal income 
taxes and actual or expected wage gains augur well for 
the retail sector. Others, including one citing recent stock 
market volatility, opined that consumers were likely to be 
cautious.  
Boston-area hotels had their strongest December in five 
years. Despite a slow start during the first half, the aver-
age room occupancy rate in 2017 was 82.2 percent, the 
highest rate ever recorded and the fifth straight year 
above the hotel industry “gold standard” of 80 percent. 
Some in the tourism industry expressed concern that 
foreign travel to the United States will decline in 2018. 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Only one of the ten First District manufacturers contact-
ed this cycle reported lower sales – a gun maker. Other-
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

A-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston  
wise, all manufacturing contacts reported higher sales 
than a year ago. Contacts in the semiconductor area 
reported strong sales and new orders. Demand was 
strong in other industries as well, including a manufactur-
er of membranes used in batteries and filters who report-
ed December sales up 10 percent to 15 percent versus 
the previous year. 
Several contacts reported constraints on the supply side. 
Two said they faced shortages of electronic parts; one 
attributed the shortages to new phones that “soaked up 
world supply” for selected components. Another supply 
issue was trucking. A contact said that companies now 
have to plan well in advance to guarantee trucking ca-
pacity; finding it at short notice is either impossible or 
very expensive – the main issue is a shortage of drivers.  
Manufacturing respondents had a positive outlook. In 
general, contacts were increasing capital expenditures, 
although only one reported a major increase in spending 
(to build a new plant in New Hampshire). Contacts said 
that it was too soon to determine the effect of the new 
tax code on capital spending.  
Staffing Services 
New England staffing firms have seen mostly negative 
results over the last quarter of 2017 and the start of 
2018, with the majority reporting revenue declines year-
over-year. For most respondents, this reflects a low 
unemployment environment that has slowed hiring vol-
umes and increased competition for the remaining labor 
supply. Some also remarked on the entry of new tech 
firms specializing in job posting sites, which has made it 
easier for companies to host job searches without using 
intermediaries. This has sparked experimentation as 
they look for ways to distinguish themselves through 
advertising, branding, improving online reviews, and 
increased attention to building relationships with poten-
tial talent. One respondent reported the temporary place-
ment side of their business was the strongest, while 
most noted that few workers want temporary positions in 
the current labor market. All anticipate the continuation 
of a robust economy and expect to continue to work 
under the constraints of a tight labor market for the fore-
seeable future. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Contacts offered mostly upbeat reports on commercial 
real estate activity in the First District. Office leasing 
activity remained robust in greater Providence, driving 
further increases in rents, although suburban office 
locations remained less sought-after. Rhode Island’s 
industrial property market continued to experience strong 
demand. Boston posted an increase in office leasing 
activity, while leasing activity slowed across all sectors in 
Connecticut. Construction activity remained robust in 
Providence and Boston, but luxury multifamily construc-
tion continued to dominate in Boston where some con-
tacts cited ongoing concerns about overbuilding in that 
submarket.  
Respondents across the First District voiced concerns 
that commercial property values could fall in response to 
rising yields on long-term Treasuries, and cited both 
upside and downside risks related to recent changes in 
federal tax laws and the recently signed federal budget. 
A Connecticut contact said business sentiment remained 
very weak, leading to a pessimistic outlook for commer-
cial real estate activity. A Rhode Island contact expected 
slower economic growth in the second half of 2018; by 
contrast, Boston contacts forecasted stable or strength-
ening growth despite risks in some submarkets. 
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District 
showed declines in closed sales despite strong demand. 
Closed sales for single-family homes decreased in four 
out of the six reporting areas, while New Hampshire and 
Maine reported moderate increases. For condos, sales 
decreased in all reporting areas but Maine. (Three of the 
six states, as well as the Greater Boston area, reported 
data through December 2017; Maine, New Hampshire 
and Vermont reported results to January 2018.) 
Median sales prices increased for both single-family 
homes and condos, except in Vermont. Low inventory 
continued to be a key constraint in the First District, with 
all areas except Greater Boston reporting substantial 
decreases in inventory.  
Contacts expressed positive outlooks in terms of market 
activity, citing strong buyer demand and the prospect of 
rising mortgage rates as the reasons. A Boston contact 
noted “Despite these drops in overall sales, activity has 
remained strong and we’re seeing an eager buyer popu-
lation .” ■ 

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District grew at a modest pace in the latest reporting period, while the labor market has 
remained tight. Input price pressures intensified, while selling prices continued to rise modestly. Growth in the manufac-
turing and distribution industries slowed to a moderate pace, and activity declined in some service industries. Consumer 
spending has weakened somewhat, though this was partially attributed to unseasonably harsh weather across much of 
the District. Housing markets have been mixed, with the sales market a bit firmer but the rental market steady to softer, 
especially at the high end. Commercial real estate markets were also mixed, with strength in the industrial segment but 
some slackening in the office and retail markets. Industrial construction activity remained robust, while office construc-
tion remained sluggish and multi-family construction was mixed. Finally, banks reported slightly weaker loan demand 
from the household sector, and steady to lower delinquency rates.     
   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight, while hiring activity 
has been steady. One employment agency in upstate 
New York noted that hiring was sluggish in January but 
picked up in February. A major New York City agency 
indicated that labor demand has remained brisk, while 
qualified candidates have been in increasingly short 
supply—particularly for jobs requiring technical skills. 
One contact noted that drug testing and background 
checks have disqualified many job applicants. 
Business contacts in most industries indicated that they 
are expanding staff modestly, with the exception of 
retailers, who indicated that they have reduced staff 
slightly. Hiring plans for the months ahead have re-
mained fairly strong.  
Businesses in the service sector reported further accel-
eration in wages, and a sizable proportion of firms 
across most industries indicated plans to raise wages in 
the months ahead. A New York City agency reports that 
most new hiring involves recruiting candidates who are 
already employed, and that this has made businesses 
increasingly negotiable on wages. A number of contacts 
in industries such as health care, retail, and restaurants 
noted they have been squeezed by wage pressures, 
including the recent hike in New York State’s minimum 
wage rates. Some businesses have refrained from rais-
ing wages that are already above the new minimum.         
Prices  
Input prices have accelerated sharply, according to 
contacts in most industry sectors, and a sizable number 
of businesses foresee further hikes in the months ahead. 
However, businesses generally report that they have 
raised their selling prices only modestly. Looking ahead, 
a growing proportion of businesses in retail and whole-
sale trade said that they planned to hike prices in the 
coming months.     
Consumer Spending 
Retail contacts reported that sales have weakened in 
early 2018, falling short of 2017 levels. Retailers in up-
state New York indicated that customer traffic has been 
fairly robust in recent weeks, despite unusually cold and 
snowy weather, but that sales were down from a year 
earlier. The trend toward online shopping has continued 
to adversely affect many brick and mortar stores—
particularly small businesses—though jewelry stores, 
nail salons, and other service providers have been less 
affected. Inventories were generally reported to be at 
satisfactory levels, and retailers were moderately opti-
mistic about the near-term outlook.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
New vehicle sales in upstate New York were reported to 
be steady to softer since the last report, while sales of 
used cars were mixed. Vehicle inventories were said to 
be in fairly good shape. Dealers continued to character-
ize retail and wholesale credit conditions as favorable. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) edged down but remained at a very high level in 
January.      
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers and wholesalers reported that growth 
slowed to a moderate pace, while transportation firms 
indicated that activity leveled off following robust growth 
in late 2017. Looking ahead, manufacturers expressed 
increasingly widespread optimism about the near-term 
outlook and noted that they were planning on boosting 
capital spending. Contacts in wholesale distribution and 
transportation were moderately optimistic.       
Services 
Reports from service-sector firms were mixed. Business-
es in the information and leisure & hospitality industries 
reported that activity has declined, though part of this—
at least for the latter—may be weather-related. Contacts 
in professional & business services and education & 
health again reported modest growth in activity.  
Still, service sector businesses were generally optimistic 
about the near-term outlook, except in leisure & hospital-
ity, where optimism was more subdued.  
Broadway theaters reported that business was brisk in 
January, with attendance up more than 10 percent from 
a year earlier and revenues up more than 20 percent. 
However, both tapered off noticeably in February but 
were still up moderately from a year ago.          
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed, 
with the sales market picking up slightly but the rental 
market steady to softer. Real estate contacts in upstate 
New York reported that sales activity slowed in January, 
partly reflecting unseasonably harsh weather, though 
buyer traffic and listings picked up in February. In north-
ern New Jersey, prices have been essentially flat, while 
sales volume declined slightly from a year ago. However, 
in Long Island, the Mid-Hudson Valley, and southwest-
ern Connecticut, home sales have been fairly brisk, and 
prices have risen 3-5 percent.  
New York City’s co-op and condo market has also seen 
fairly brisk activity, though apartment prices have been 
flat overall—up modestly at the lower end but down at 
the high end of the market. The inventory of homes on 
the market was reported to be very thin throughout the 
District, except in Manhattan where it has been steady at 
a moderate level.  
Rental markets have been mixed but, on balance, softer. 
New York City’s rental market has weakened further, 
particularly at the high end. Effective rents have trended 
down, reflecting a combination of modestly declining 
face rents and rising landlord concessions. While these 
concessions have been common for high-end rentals for 
some time, they have recently been used on lower-
priced units as well. However, rental markets in northern 
New Jersey, upstate New York, and the suburbs around 
New York City have held up better, with rents steady to 
up modestly. 
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed. Office 
availability rates were steady to up slightly, while asking 
rents were mostly flat. The retail market has slackened 
more noticeably, especially in New York City, where 
vacancy rates have climbed to multi-year highs. In north-
ern New Jersey and upstate New York, retail vacancies 
have been fairly stable. The industrial market, in con-
trast, has continued to strengthen, as availability rates 
have continued to decline throughout the District. Indus-
trial rents in and around New York City and northern 
New Jersey have risen at more than a 10 percent pace, 
while rents in upstate New York have been stable.   
Multi-family construction activity has remained brisk in 
northern New Jersey and has picked up across upstate 
New York, but has slowed in New York City. Office con-
struction has been subdued, but industrial construction 
has been fairly robust.       
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
mixed demand for loans overall. Demand declined by a 
bit more than the seasonal norms for consumer loans 
and for residential mortgages but increased modestly for 
commercial mortgages. Refinancing activity also report-
edly decreased. Bankers reported higher credit stand-
ards for C&I loans but unchanged standards for other 
types of loans. Finally, bankers reported lower delin-
quency rates for residential mortgages and unchanged 
delinquency rates across all other categories. ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Nonauto retail sales, tourist activity, manufacturing, nonfinancial services, and nonresidential leasing markets 
grew modestly, while little change was noted by contacts from new home construction, existing home sales, and nonres-
idential construction. Auto sales continued to decline modestly. On balance, employment, wages, and prices continued 
to grow modestly. The percentage of firms anticipating continued growth over the next six months remained essentially 
the same; however, the percentage fell somewhat among manufacturers and rose among nonmanufacturers. Several 
contacts observed that sentiment appears to be running a bit hotter than tangible signs of production and investment. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. Manufacturing and non-
manufacturing firms reported ongoing net additions to 
staff, while average hours worked edged higher over the 
period for manufacturing firms but fell among nonmanu-
facturers.  
On balance, wage growth held steady at a modest pace; 
the share of nonmanufacturing firms reporting increases 
held steady at about one-third. Most banking contacts 
noted the apparent disconnect between frequent talk of 
labor shortages and the lack of evidence that wages are 
rising significantly in response.  
Staffing firms reported being busy in many of the Dis-
trict’s labor markets; wage pressures varied a bit more. 
In two markets, wage rates were up about 3 percent, 
while firms pushed back against 3 percent hikes in an-
other market with mostly manufacturing clients. Staffing 
contacts also noted healthy receivables and an absence 
of any other signs of financial deterioration from clients.   
Prices  
On balance, prices modestly, although greater price 
pressures began to emerge among manufacturers. Most 
contacts continued to report no change in prices paid 
and received. However, the percentage of manufacturing 
firms reporting increases rose significantly for prices paid 
and for prices received for their own goods. Among 
nonmanufacturing firms, contacts reported little change 
for prices paid and received.  
Builders continued to note rising prices for construction 
materials as well as labor, but no acceleration. Existing 
home prices also continued to rise, as sellers have failed 
to emerge in sufficient quantity to provide inventories 
that meet the demand in most markets.  
Looking ahead one year, manufacturing firms now antici-
pate receiving significantly higher prices for their own 
goods and services than they expected one quarter 
earlier. However, nonmanufacturing firms have lowered 
their expectations slightly. Overall, firms also reported 
somewhat higher expectations for annual consumer 
inflation. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity continued at a mod-
est pace of growth, with little change in shipments and in 
general activity, although orders dipped somewhat.  
The makers of chemicals, primary metal products, indus-
trial machinery, and electronic equipment continued to 
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

C-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  
note gains in new orders and shipments; firms in the 
lumber, paper, and fabricated metal sectors reported 
more mixed results with some declines in activity.  
Most manufacturing contacts continued to expect gen-
eral activity to increase over the next six months; howev-
er, the percentage of firms expecting future increases did 
retreat below 60 percent. By comparison, the percentage 
of firms expecting increases in future capital expendi-
tures and future employment held mostly steady at levels 
just above 40 percent.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales continued to grow 
modestly. While the weather this year was generally 
more inviting for shoppers than last year, one contact 
noted that a snowstorm in January hurt sales when it 
occurred and then again in February because several 
school districts chose to make up that time on Presi-
dents’ Day, thereby affecting the critical holiday sale.  
Auto dealers continued to report modest declines in year
-over-year sales this period. Although sales remain at
high levels, dealers noted lower profitability and worries
about the future.
Tourism contacts continued to report modest growth 
overall. A Philadelphia contact noted that hotels benefit-
ed from several large conventions, Eagles’ home playoff 
games, and the Super Bowl itself, which drew local fans 
for downtown hotel stays in anticipation of the evening 
celebration. A Delaware contact reported strong growth 
from an inland hotel and heavy traffic, packed outlets, 
and busy recreation venues at the shore, although shore 
hotels did not benefit. Also, Atlantic City’s casino reve-
nues returned to negative year-over-year comparisons.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms have continued to 
report modest growth in general activity since the prior 
Beige Book period. The percentage of firms reporting an 
increase in sales and the percentage of firms reporting 
greater orders were essentially unchanged. However, 
expectations about future growth were more widespread, 
with nearly two-thirds of the firms anticipating increased 
activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported little change in overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) after experiencing 
modest growth in the prior Beige Book period. Volumes 
did grow moderately in mortgages, commercial real 
estate loans, and commercial and industrial (C&I) lend-
ing. Home equity lines fell moderately, and auto loans 
dropped slightly, while growth of other consumer loans 
was strong.  
Credit card lending fell substantially as consumers paid 
down holiday bills; however, the seasonal decline this 
year matched the decline in the comparable prior-year 
period. Also, over the entire year, credit card loan vol-
umes and total lending in all the other categories com-
bined have grown at a moderate pace.  
Banking contacts continued to describe solid ongoing 
economic growth in most parts of the District. Although 
they described the confidence of consumers and busi-
nesses as running high, many noted that the sentiment 
appears greater than the tangible evidence of new con-
sumption and investment. Overall, contacts noted that 
credit standards remain unchanged, credit quality re-
mains very sound, and credit conditions were not ex-
pected to shift through the current year.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported little overall change in activity. 
Sales traffic was weak as the year began and was only 
just beginning to pick up as February drew to a close. 
Contacts mentioned several possible factors, including 
higher interest rates and weekend distractions from the 
Eagles’ playoff run.  
Brokers in Third District housing markets reported mixed 
results for existing homes sales, with slight increases in 
the Lehigh Valley and the Greater Philadelphia area, but 
a modest decrease at the Jersey Shore. Increasingly 
lower inventories of houses continue to constrain sales 
and place upward pressure on house prices.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts reported little change 
in the high levels of overall construction, although activity 
may begin to wane a bit at year-end unless new projects 
are forthcoming. Industrial/warehouse space continues 
to be the most robust sector throughout much of the 
District. Contacts have expressed more caution about 
multifamily housing and office space projects, which 
have tempered their pace. Neither real estate nor bank-
ing contacts have expressed concern about overbuilding 
of commercial real estate. Leasing activity has picked up 
a bit to a modest pace, mostly due to a growing cohort of 
leases that are up for renewal. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District expanded at a moderate pace since our last report. Labor demand remains 
strong, but worker shortages are limiting firms’ ability to hire. Competition for qualified workers has led employers to 
raise wages. Some firms reported that the Tax Cut and Jobs Act is enabling them to increase investment and raise 
worker pay. Upward pressure on input costs continued at the same pace as that seen during the past few reporting 
cycles. Firms generally were able to increase their selling prices. Retailers reported a continued boost in sales going 
into the first quarter, and they attributed this boost to stronger consumer confidence. Housing and commercial real 
estate markets remained buoyant. Manufacturing output trended higher.  
  
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets in the Fourth District tightened during the 
survey period as demand for talent exceeded the availa-
ble supply. Hiring was strongest in manufacturing and 
construction. Retailers pared their workforces, citing the 
end of the holiday shopping season and a need to gain 
efficiencies. Transportation firms trimmed payrolls be-
cause of lower seasonal demand and driver shortages 
that prompted efforts to boost efficiency. Across indus-
tries, the majority of firms reported replacing staff or 
making seasonal adjustments, though a sizeable share 
said they had created positions. Overall, the market for 
talent remains challenging. Turnover and an aging work-
force were commonly cited as key challenges. Retire-
ments are limiting the potential pool of workers. One 
construction contact noted that he is expecting signifi-
cant labor shortages this year. A steel producer ob-
served that every time his firm gets close to having a full 
staff, someone quits. The tough competition for workers 
led employers to raise wages during the survey period, 
especially for lower-wage jobs. Contacts speculated that 
savings resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) 
will, in part, support pay increases over the short to 
medium terms. A few bankers expect to raise minimum 
pay to $15 per hour within the next year or two. Howev-
er, few contacts expect the tax cuts to lead to more 
robust hiring. Rather, firms expect to maintain their re-
cent hiring pace over the short term.  
Prices  
Non-labor input costs rose for a majority of contacts, at a 
pace similar to that of the previous survey period. A 
combination of stronger demand, supply constraints, and 
higher materials prices elevated non-labor costs, espe-
cially in the construction, manufacturing, and transporta-
tion industries. Steel producers reported raising selling 
prices because of a decline in market share for foreign 
steel and expectations about potential outcomes of 
pending trade cases. Manufacturers further down the 
supply chain reported sizeable increases in the price of 
steel that they purchased. Firms’ ability to pass through 
price increases to their customers was little changed 
from the previous survey period, though there was con-
siderable variation across industries. Transportation 
companies across the board were able to raise freight 
rates in response to higher fuel costs and capacity con-
straints. Similarly, construction firms were able to pass 
along their higher input costs without much pushback. 
Retailers, however, cited competition as a reason for 
their holding or lowering their selling prices.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported improving sales during the survey 
period. Some retailers indicated that in early 2018 they 
were still benefiting from the holiday season. Others 
reported that rising consumer confidence could help 
explain stronger customer demand that began in Novem-
ber 2017. Most retailers were optimistic that sales would 
continue to increase during the remainder of the current 
quarter and into the next. Auto dealers experienced more 
challenges than their general retail counterparts at the 
beginning of the year. Unit sales of new motor vehicles 
declined about 7 percent in January compared to those 
of a year ago. Contacts indicated that this was due in 
part to poor weather conditions and higher interest rates. 
One dealer reported that new motor vehicle sales were 
beginning to slow after five to seven years of growth, 
increasing dealer inventories, especially for new cars. 
Pressure from OEMs to buy excess products also con-
tributed to higher than normal inventory levels.   
Manufacturing 
Demand for manufactured goods increased during the 
survey period and on a year-over-year basis for many of 
our contacts. Strong customer confidence and seasonal 
demand changes for industrial products contributed to 
new manufacturing orders. One producer of residential 
HVAC systems reported a large increase in output during 
January compared with that of a year ago thanks to 
stronger consumer confidence and rising liquidity. Manu-
facturers of material handling and construction equip-
ment were optimistic in their outlook. Rising commodity 
prices are encouraging demand for products from extrac-
tive and metal recycling equipment producers. Fabricat-
ed metals producers cited particularly strong growth 
because of decreased competition from imports. Imports 
have reportedly fallen because of stronger global de-
mand and concerns about potential outcomes of pending 
trade cases. Most contacts in the fabricated metals 
industry reported that the TCJA and business-friendly 
policies are encouraging capital expansions and in-
creased investment. They expect strong demand growth 
to continue with increased infrastructure spending. Con-
tacts in the plastics industry relayed a mixed picture, with 
some contacts reporting slowing demand along seasonal 
trends and oversupply within the industry.  
Real Estate and Construction 
For most homebuilders, demand was stable or had 
improved since December and on a year-over-year 
basis. One contact reported that an improving labor 
market was boosting demand. Almost all homebuilders 
increased their base prices during the survey period as 
demand rose and as materials and labor costs in-
creased. Some contacts specifically cited the Canadian 
lumber tax as a source of increased materials costs. The 
average sales price of new and existing single family 
homes increased 5 percent during January compared to 
those of a year ago. Homebuilders continued to raise 
wages to decrease turnover rates and to attract the best 
talent. Some homebuilders struggled to fill positions for 
framers, bricklayers, and drywall hangers.  
Nonresidential builders saw a boost in inquiries at the 
beginning of 2018. Rising demand was attributed to 
improving economic conditions and higher customer 
confidence. Builders increased their billing rates because 
of rising demand and materials costs, both of which are 
expected to trend higher into the next quarter. Contacts 
reported that some lenders remain cautious when con-
sidering project financing, especially for multifamily de-
velopments.   
Financial Services 
Demand increased for C&I loans and for commercial real 
estate lending during the survey period. Bankers specu-
lated that they are beginning to see an impact from the 
TCJA, saying that at the beginning of the first quarter, 
credit demand grew significantly because of pent-up 
demand for capital and real estate. Business lending 
was stronger on a year-over-year basis, with contacts 
citing greater customer confidence, improving market 
conditions, and expanding footprints. On the consumer 
side, credit card usage was seasonally lower following 
the holiday boom, while direct and indirect auto lending 
increased. One banker noted that consumers have built 
up home equity and that drawdowns on HELOCs are 
expected to increase as the spring home improvement 
season begins. Delinquency rates were stable. One 
contact said that current lending standards are working 
efficiently and that delinquency rates are quite low.   
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector grew at a 
moderate-to-strong pace. Rising freight volumes across 
product segments were attributed primarily to solid eco-
nomic growth. Freight haulers were concerned about 
capacity constraints caused by labor shortages. This 
situation is forcing freight customers to transition from 
truck to rail carriers. Within the professional services 
sector, contacts from engineering, software develop-
ment, and accounting firms reported the strongest de-
mand growth, which they said was due to passage of the 
TCJA and confidence in the overall economy.  ■ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate pace since our previous report. Manufacturing activity increased 
moderately but firms faced longer vendor lead times due, in part, to trucking delays. Trucking firms concurred, saying that 
driver shortages kept them from meeting the high demand. District ports saw moderate growth, overall, as export activity 
picked up and, at some ports, came more in line with imports. Retailers experienced a slight slowdown in recent weeks. 
Tourism and travel remained robust despite a few disruptions from wintry weather. Reports on commercial real estate 
conditions were mostly positive but varied by region. Likewise, lenders across the Fifth District gave somewhat mixed 
reports on commercial loan demand. Nonfinancial services firms generally experienced a moderate rise in demand and 
revenues, although there were some reports of profit margin compression. The demand for labor increased moderately 
and many employers had challenges finding workers. Wage pressures broadened, and more firms were raising starting 
wages and offering expanded benefits to attract new hires. Prices continued to grow at a modest pace, overall.   
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor rose moderately in recent weeks. 
A staffing agent reported a modest increase in orders as 
the lack of available workers to fill permanent positions 
drove more employers to staffing firms for temporary 
help, particularly in manufacturing, warehousing, and 
distribution. Contacts also reported difficulty filling posi-
tions for IT professionals, engineers, accountants, health 
care providers, and construction workers. Some employ-
ers said they were willing to train underqualified workers 
but had trouble finding workers with soft skills and a 
strong work ethic. Upward wage pressures continued to 
broaden moderately. In addition to raising starting wag-
es, there were some reports of employers looking to 
attract workers with expanded benefit packages and 
more flexible work schedules.  
Prices  
Since our previous report, prices grew at a modest pace. 
According to our most recent surveys, manufacturers 
reported moderate increases in input costs, which out-
paced growth in selling prices. Some of the largest raw 
materials price increases were reported for lumber, 
plastics, metals, and packaging materials. A food manu-
facturer saw prices rise for flour and sugar but decline 
slightly for poultry, eggs, and beef. Service sector prices 
grew modestly, overall. Export prices rose slightly for 
metallurgical coal but declined somewhat for thermal 
coal. Meanwhile, natural gas prices declined modestly in 
recent weeks.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity grew moderately in recent weeks. 
A South Carolina copper parts manufacturer noted in-
creased sales in both foreign and domestic markets, and 
an electronics manufacturer in Maryland reported an 
increase in defense-related orders. A South Carolina 
packaging manufacturer saw improved business condi-
tions and began to increase capital investment in antici-
pation of higher interest rates. A Virginia wood-product 
manufacturer reported unpredictable business from 
week to week, as demand from restaurants increased 
while demand from retailers slowed. Manufacturers 
across the District continued to face supply chain disrup-
tions resulting from delays in trucking. 
Ports and Transportation 
Port activity picked up moderately in recent weeks, with 
increases in both imports and exports. Faster growth in 
exports at some ports left them with a better balance in 
volume growth. Recent increases in exports were largely 
driven by automotive and commodities shipments. A 
North Carolina port attributed much of its growth to ex-
porting wood chips to the UK to be used as fuel. Howev-
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
er, a Maryland port continued to see more than twice as 
many loaded import containers as loaded export contain-
ers.  
Trucking companies saw sustained growth in recent 
weeks, and many reported being unable to meet in-
creased demand. A North Carolina company reported 
demand of about two truckloads for every available 
truck. Trucking companies have continued to turn away 
business because of driver shortages and expect this 
problem to worsen in coming months as shipments pick 
up seasonally in the spring.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retailers experienced somewhat sluggish sales in recent 
weeks. Many firms noted a drop in revenues but re-
mained optimistic that business would pick up in the near 
future. District auto dealers were seeing low credit 
scores prevent many customers from purchasing cars. A 
Maryland plumbing supplier said business was at a 
twelve-year high, and a Maryland hardware store saw an 
uptick in sales resulting from snow storms as people 
bought gear for removing snow and heating their homes. 
A West Virginia sporting goods retailer said strong 
wholesale demand made up for weak retail demand. 
Tourism remained robust in recent weeks. Hotel stays 
around the District continued to increase; however, some 
North Carolina hotels reported that their business was 
suffering from increasing competition, despite strong 
tourism. A Virginia outdoor center reported having to turn 
away visitors as bookings increased. Tourism in D.C. 
adjusted down to normal levels compared to abnormally 
strong business last winter. Also, it did not suffer as 
much from the federal government shutdown as in the 
past because of its brevity. District ski resorts experi-
enced a strong season, after a few weak years. Howev-
er, winter weather hurt tourism elsewhere in the District, 
particularly in South Carolina, where the Charleston 
airport was shut down for four days. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Most Fifth District residential real estate contacts report-
ed increases in sales and buyer traffic, and decreased 
inventories in the past few weeks. Although prices were 
generally increasing, one report from Washington, D.C. 
noted that the average price was lower due to higher 
sales in the lower price ranges. Agents across the Fifth 
District commented that lower priced inventory was 
absorbed quickly and that homes at the higher price 
points were slower to move. A few reports noted in-
creased demand for large tracts of land for lot and house 
development, but it would be some time before the con-
struction activity translated into increased inventories.  
In commercial real estate, traffic and sales increased 
and prices were steady in recent weeks, although activity 
varied by geographic area and industry segment. An 
executive from Columbia, SC and another from Rich-
mond, VA reported speculative construction in the indus-
trial market. The Columbia report also noted strong 
activity in retail, including construction of small retail 
space. There was also steady demand for restaurant 
space. There were a few reports of slowing office-related 
activity. On the other hand, office activity expanded in 
Virginia Beach and there was strong demand for Class A 
urban office space and Class B suburban space in the 
Charlotte, NC area.  
Banking and Finance 
Since our previous report, loan demand increased slight-
ly. Residential mortgage lending was flat to slightly low-
er, reflecting a typical seasonal slowdown, while re-
finance loan demand fell slightly. Interest rates edged 
higher in recent weeks. A banker in West Virginia at-
tributed the decline in mortgage refinancing to the rise in 
interest rates. Deposits were up moderately, overall. 
Reports on commercial loan demand varied. For exam-
ple, lenders in Maryland and North Carolina saw modest 
increases in commercial lending, while contacts in cen-
tral Virginia and West Virginia reported flat to slightly 
lower demand. Credit quality remained strong. Credit 
standards declined slightly amidst reports of some higher 
loan-to-value ratios being accepted.  
Non-Financial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services rose moderately in 
recent weeks. Professional and business services and 
administrative support services were among the sectors 
to report the strongest demand. An advertising and 
marketing firm saw steady demand but noted that rising 
input costs were compressing profit margins as they 
were unable to raise prices for their services. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business contacts indicated that economic activity in the Sixth District continued to expand, albeit modestly, from early 
January through mid-February. The near-term outlook among District contacts remains positive. On balance, the labor 
market remained tight and wage pressures were mild. Contacts indicated that non-labor input costs picked up slightly. 
Retailers cited steady sales since the previous report; however, automobile dealers indicated sales were soft. Tourism 
activity was robust across most of the District. Residential real estate builders and brokers indicated that home sales 
and inventory levels were flat to slightly down compared with a year ago. Home prices continued to increase modestly. 
Demand for commercial real estate continued to improve and commercial construction activity was flat or increased 
slightly. Manufacturers noted solid activity.  
Employment and Wages  
District contacts continued to report challenges filling 
certain positions, particularly in information technology, 
nursing, some skilled crafts, long-haul transportation, 
manufacturing, accounting, and low-skill/entry-level 
positions in many industries. Many employers noted that 
they continued to broaden their geographical area 
search for candidates, often pursuing workers from rural 
areas or from abroad. Firms also resorted to workforce 
training and education services to increase the pipeline 
of qualified workers. Additionally, employers further 
adopted strategies to improve worker satisfaction as an 
important tool to help attract and retain workers. 
Broadly, contacts noted steady but modest wage growth; 
however, an increasing number of contacts reported 
either recently increasing wages or plans to do so in the 
coming months. This narrative was apparent among 
firms in the transportation, retail, finance, construction, 
and professional and business services sectors.     
Prices  
Businesses across the District reported a slight uptick in 
non-labor input costs and some contacts indicated an 
ability to pass along price increases. The Atlanta Fed’s 
Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-
over-year unit costs were up 1.8 percent in February. 
Looking ahead, survey respondents indicated that they 
expect unit costs to rise 2.0 percent over the next twelve 
months.       
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
On balance, District retailers reported steady sales levels 
since the last report. Recreation retailers noted an in-
crease in sales levels during the first few weeks of the 
year, while automotive dealers reported a slow start to 
2018. The outlook among most retail contacts remains 
positive. 
Travel and tourism contacts across the District noted a 
strong start to 2018 with growth in business and leisure 
travel since the last report. Hotel demand was higher 
than expected in the fourth quarter of 2017; a trend that 
has carried over into the first quarter of 2018. Contacts in 
Georgia and Florida cited an uptick in the number of 
visitors and spending over the first six weeks of the year. 
The outlook remains positive with healthy advanced 
bookings across the District through the first quarter of 
this year.    
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from District residential real estate contacts 
signaled continued modest growth. Builder reports on 
construction activity in January compared to one year 
earlier were mixed. Builders and brokers indicated that 
home sales activity was flat to slightly down from the 
year-ago level. Many brokers reported buyer traffic was 
flat to down slightly, while builder reports were mixed. 
Most builders and brokers said inventory levels were 
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
down from one year ago. Builders and brokers noted that 
home prices increased in January. Looking ahead, bro-
kers and builders expect home sales activity over the 
next three months will hold steady or increase slightly 
relative to the year-ago level. Many builders expect the 
pace of construction activity over the next three months 
to remain unchanged or to increase slightly. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts reported 
improvements in demand that resulted in rent growth, 
particularly in industrial and warehouse/distribution prop-
erties. However, contacts continued to caution that the 
rate of improvement varies by metropolitan area, sub-
market, and property type. The majority of commercial 
contractors indicated that the pace of nonresidential 
construction activity was flat to slightly up relative to one 
year ago. Most contacts indicated that they have a 
healthy pipeline of activity, with the majority indicating 
backlogs greater than or similar to the previous year’s 
level. The majority of reports noted that the pace of 
multifamily construction matched the year-ago level. The 
outlook among commercial contacts for nonresidential 
and multifamily construction remained positive, with the 
majority anticipating activity to match or exceed the 
current level.      
Manufacturing 
District manufacturers reported solid overall business 
activity since the last reporting period. Although most 
contacts indicated that production levels were holding 
steady, demand for their products continued to be rela-
tively strong. Firms said that employment levels were flat 
to slightly up, and most contacts reported that they had 
open positions they were finding difficult to fill. Firms 
reported that input costs continued to rise, specifically 
steel, brass, and copper. In general, contacts are opti-
mistic about future demand, suggesting that they expect 
sales levels to be up over the short to medium term.      
Transportation 
District transportation firms cited mixed results since the 
previous report. Ports continued to see year-over-year 
increases in container volumes and cargo tonnage. Year
-to-date total rail traffic was down by double digits com-
pared with year-ago levels, impacted mostly by de-
creased shipments of grain, non-metallic minerals, iron 
and steel scrap, and metallic ores. Intermodal traffic was 
also down. Trucking firms reported some pricing power 
amid strong demand and tight capacity.       
Banking and Finance  
District bankers indicated that credit remained readily 
available for most qualified borrowers except for some 
contacts in energy and commercial real estate industries. 
Banking contacts noted healthy loan pipelines and com-
munity banks, in particular, reported good loan demand. 
Some banks indicated more deposit pressure as short-
term interest rates increased.        
Energy  
Planning and build out of natural gas and crude oil pipe-
lines continued along the Gulf Coast. Contacts indicated 
that increased spending on pipeline infrastructure and 
other oil and gas projects intensified labor constraints in 
an already tight environment for certain skilled crafts. 
Freezing conditions across the Gulf Coast led a number 
of refineries to temporarily reduce or cease operations. 
Some refineries experienced power outages and other 
technical issues, however contacts indicated that the 
impact to product supplies was not significant. Persistent 
and unusual freezing temperatures across the region 
also caused power consumption to surge, which led to a 
brief spike in natural gas and heating oil pricing.      
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Drought conditions persisted in much of the District. 
However, rain in February brought some relief. The 
January forecast for Florida's orange crops was down 
further from the previous report as the effects of the 
Hurricane Irma continued to be felt. On a year-over-year 
basis, prices paid to farmers in December were up for 
cotton rice, beef, broilers, and eggs and down for corn 
and soybeans.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District remained at a moderate pace in January and early February, and 
contacts expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment and manufacturing pro-
duction increased moderately, business spending rose modestly, construction and real estate activity grew slightly, and 
consumer spending was down slightly. Wages increased modestly, prices rose slightly, and financial conditions deterio-
rated some, on balance. Expectations for overall farm income in 2018 improved somewhat, though farmers continued to 
face challenging conditions. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased at a moderate pace over the 
reporting period, and contacts expected gains to contin-
ue at this rate over the next 6 to 12 months. As they 
have for some time, contacts indicated that the labor 
market was tight and reported difficulties filling positions 
at all skill levels. Hiring was focused on professional and 
technical, production, and sales workers, though there 
was a notable pickup in the number of firms looking to 
hire administrative workers. In addition, a staffing firm 
that primarily supplies manufacturers with production 
workers reported an increase in billable hours. Wage 
growth remained modest overall, though the number of 
contacts who reported pay increases for management 
and production workers was higher than a few months 
ago. In addition, most firms reported increasing benefits 
costs. 
Prices 
Overall, prices again rose slightly in January and early 
February, though more contacts now expect the rate of 
increase to pick up over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail 
prices increased slightly overall. Producer prices also 
rose slightly, reflecting in part the pass-through of higher 
raw materials and freight costs. There was a decline in 
the number of contacts reporting increased tax and 
regulatory costs.  
 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was down slightly over the reporting 
period. Non-auto retail sales were flat on balance: gains 
in the electronics and appliance, building and gardening, 
entertainment, and health and personal care segments 
were offset by declines in the furniture, apparel, and 
grocery segments. Contacts continued to report strong e
-commerce growth. New light vehicle sales volumes 
were down a bit, with flat sales in January and lower 
sales in early February. A number of dealers suggested 
that stock market volatility led potential customers to 
delay vehicle purchases. Despite the slow start to the 
year, contacts generally believed total light vehicle sales 
for 2018 would be similar to those for 2017. Used vehicle 
sales remained flat, and the vehicle mix for new and 
used vehicles continued to shift from cars to light trucks. 
Demand for residential energy increased moderately. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in January and 
early February. Retail and manufacturing contacts indi-
cated that inventories were generally at comfortable 
levels. Capital spending increased modestly, though 
contacts expected moderate growth over the next 6 to 12 
months. Outlays were primarily for replacing industrial 
and IT equipment and for renovating structures. Demand 
for commercial and industrial energy increased slightly, 
and transportation demand increased moderately. 
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

G-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity ticked up over the 
reporting period. Residential construction rose modestly, 
and contacts expected activity to increase moderately 
over the next 6 to 12 months. With rising costs squeez-
ing margins, contacts noted that homebuilders were 
focusing on the construction of high-price, high-margin 
housing. Overall, home sales were up slightly: sales of 
starter homes increased in spite of low inventories, while 
sales of high-end homes were flat and inventories am-
ple. Home prices rose slightly, with stronger increases in 
the starter home segment. Nonresidential construction 
edged lower on balance, though building is expected to 
increase modestly going forward. Commercial real estate 
activity increased slightly from an already strong level, 
and contacts expected activity to increase slightly further 
over the next 6 to 12 months. Commercial rents rose 
slightly as vacancy rates decreased, and the availability 
of sublease space was little changed. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production continued at a mod-
erate rate in January and early February. Steel produc-
tion increased at a moderate pace in response to solid 
end-user demand and the rebuilding of inventories at 
steel service centers. Demand for heavy machinery also 
increased moderately as mining and construction activity 
continued to grow. Demand for heavy trucks was strong. 
Order books for specialty metals manufacturers in-
creased moderately: growth was spread across a wide 
variety of sectors, with particularly strong demand from 
the oil and gas, aerospace, and transportation sectors. 
Manufacturers of construction materials continued to 
report slow but steady increases in shipments, in line 
with the pace of improvement in construction. Auto pro-
duction was flat, but remained at a solid level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions deteriorated some on balance over 
the reporting period. Financial market participants noted 
falling equity prices, rising interest rates, and an increase 
in volatility. Small and medium business loan demand 
increased slightly, with growth coming primarily from 
small businesses. While competition remained strong, 
contacts reported little change in lending standards or 
loan quality. Consumer loan volume was little changed 
overall, though one contact noted a significant increase 
in demand for home equity loans since the start of the 
year. Consumer loan quality and lending standards were 
little changed. 
Agriculture 
Expectations for overall farm income in 2018 improved 
somewhat in January and early February, though much 
of the District’s farm sector remained under stress. There 
were reports of more small tracts of ground being offered 
for sale. Corn and soybean prices were up enough to 
cover a slight rise in projected production costs for 2018. 
Soybeans remained more profitable than corn for most 
operations—one contact predicted that the split of corn 
and soybean acres planted this spring will be close to 
even (corn has consistently comprised the larger share). 
Contacts noted that subsoil moisture was very depleted 
in many areas because of drought conditions last year, 
making timely spring and summer rains more important 
for crop health this coming growing season. Hog, cattle, 
and egg prices were higher, but dairy prices lagged, 
leading to an increase in the number of liquidations of 
diary operations. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have improved at a modest pace since our previous report. Firms reported modest increases in 
employment, despite continued difficulties finding workers. Wages continue to increase at a moderate pace, as do non-
labor costs. Price pressures strengthened, as contacts generally see a greater ability to increase selling prices. Reports 
on consumer spending were generally mixed, with reports of bad weather reducing foot traffic and sales. Residential 
real estate contacts continue to report sluggish sales due to low inventories, while commercial real estate activity was 
slightly better. District banking contacts reported improving loan demand. Agricultural conditions also improved, thanks 
to high yields giving a boost to profits. Overall, the outlook among contacts has improved. On net, 54 percent of contacts 
expect conditions in 2018 to be better or somewhat better than in 2017.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased modestly since the previous 
report. Of the contacts surveyed in early February, on 
net, 28 percent reported that first-quarter employment 
was higher or slightly higher than a year ago. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests that the labor market remained tight. 
Construction contacts continued to report shortages in 
qualified labor. Technology and manufacturing contacts 
in St. Louis and Memphis, respectively, also reported 
difficulties hiring suitable employees. Contacts in Louis-
ville and Little Rock cited candidates’ inability to pass 
drug tests as an impediment to hiring. 
Contacts reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report. On net, about 70 percent of contacts 
reported wages were higher or slightly higher than a year 
ago, and a similar share reported increases in labor 
costs. A construction contact in Louisville cited the need 
for higher wages to attract and retain skilled labor, while 
a contact in Little Rock reported that unskilled positions 
remain unfilled because of low wages.     
Prices  
Price pressures have moderately strengthened since the 
previous report. Firms reported modest growth in prices 
charged to consumers: On net, 33 percent of contacts 
reported that prices were higher than a year ago. Price 
increases accelerated somewhat in the second half of 
2017, as contacts reported that their ability to raise pric-
es has improved over the past three to six months. One 
food product manufacturer reported increasing their 
selling prices for the first time in 5 years. 
Non-labor input costs grew at a moderate pace. On net, 
67 percent of contacts reported that costs were higher 
than a year ago. Steel prices increased moderately 
throughout the District, and contacts in Louisville and 
Little Rock reported upticks in trucking freight rates.  
Commodity prices generally rose throughout the District. 
Wheat, sorghum, soybean meal, corn, and corn feed 
increased moderately, soybeans increased modestly, 
and coal prices increased slightly. Rice and corn meal 
prices were flat while cotton prices fell modestly. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers portray a mixed picture of consumer spending activi-
ty. January real sales tax collections increased in Arkan-
sas, Kentucky, and Missouri relative to a year ago and 
slightly decreased in Tennessee. In addition, several 
general retailers in St. Louis and Louisville indicated that 
sales fell short of expectations, attributing the slowdown 
to poor weather. Conversely, hospitality contacts in St. 
Louis reported that sales exceeded expectations.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Multiple auto dealers across the District reported a mod-
est decline in sales, which have failed to meet their 
expectations. St. Louis dealers indicated a shift in de-
mand toward high-end vehicles. 
Manufacturing 
There has been little to no growth in manufacturing since 
our previous report. A slight majority of contacts reported 
that new orders and capacity utilization were lower in the 
first quarter relative to one year ago, while production 
remained at the same level. This marks the fourth con-
secutive quarter of a decline in the share of contacts 
reporting growth in new orders and capacity utilization. 
However, the outlook of contacts remains optimistic, with 
most contacts expecting increases in production, new 
orders, and capacity utilization in the next three months.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector has expanded moderately 
since the previous report. Transportation industry con-
tacts reported that the dollar-value of sales has been 
higher in the first quarter compared with the same period 
last year. Most contacts expect sales to remain higher in 
the second quarter. While dollar sales are up, they have 
largely met expectations: More than half of contacts 
reported sales met expectations with remaining contacts 
split between falling short and exceeding expectations. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has declined slightly since 
the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home sales 
declined in January across the District’s four major 
MSAs. Contacts continued to report that shortages in 
inventory are hindering sales. On net, about half of the 
respondents reported that first-quarter sales have fallen 
short of expectations. However, demand remains strong 
and a majority of contacts expect demand for single-
family homes to increase over the next quarter. 
Residential construction activity improved modestly. 
There was a modest uptick in December’s permit activity 
within the District compared with the previous month. 
Two-thirds of local contacts reported that construction 
activity increased compared with the previous year, and 
the same fraction expects continued growth over the 
next quarter.  
Commercial real estate activity increased slightly. De-
mand for industrial and office properties increased rela-
tive to a year ago. However, contacts noted that demand 
for retail properties fell while retail inventory increased. 
Contacts expect these trends to continue into the second 
quarter of 2018.  
 
Commercial construction activity improved modestly. 
Local contacts reported increased demand for construc-
tion of all commercial property types. Over 80 percent of 
contacts, on net, expressed an optimistic outlook for 
2018, but many continued to report that a shortage of 
labor is limiting construction activity.  
Banking and Finance 
Lending conditions in the Eighth District have strength-
ened at a moderate rate since the previous report. Loan 
demand increased moderately in year-over-year terms 
and, according to District banking contacts, there were 
some signs that the pace of overall loan growth may be 
rising after slowing in 2017. Commercial and industrial 
loan demand increased moderately after exhibiting flat 
growth last quarter. Bankers reported demand for auto 
credit remained unchanged after decreasing the previ-
ous two quarters. Credit standards for auto loans in-
creased slightly. Overall, delinquencies continued declin-
ing, falling in every loan category except mortgages, 
which increased modestly. District bankers expect delin-
quencies to continue decreasing next quarter across all 
loan types, including mortgages. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have improved slightly 
since the previous reporting period. In spite of concerns 
about low temperatures in early January, the percent of 
District winter wheat rated fair or better ticked up about a 
percentage point from the end of December to the end of 
January. Contacts expressed optimism about near-term 
farm income as area farmers were able to turn strong 
yields into profits in 2017, although some expressed 
concern about the downside risks of NAFTA renegotia-
tions.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined from 
December to January, with seasonally adjusted coal 
production falling 10 percent. January production was 
also 11 percent down from a year ago.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew moderately overall since the last report, with employment, wages, and prices all seeing 
moderate growth. The District economy showed growth in consumer spending, tourism, commercial construction, manu-
facturing, real estate, energy, and mining. However, residential construction slowed, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report, as 
hiring demand appeared robust, but tight labor restrained 
stronger hiring. An ad hoc survey of Minnesota staffing 
firms found that hours booked in the first six weeks of 
2018 rose for most firms over the same period a year 
ago. Rural hiring sentiment increased notably over the 
previous month in Minnesota and the Dakotas, according 
to a February poll of rural bankers and other firms. 
Online job openings in January increased slightly in 
North Dakota over a year earlier; only the third increase 
in the past 18 months, but the second increase in the 
past four months. Tight labor markets, however, were 
limiting hiring. The number of job seekers registered with 
state workforce offices in January was 11 percent lower 
in North Dakota and 29 percent lower in Montana 
compared with a year earlier. Initial unemployment 
claims in the District over the first five weeks of 2018 fell 
almost 7 percent compared with a year earlier, though 
Minnesota’s decline was less than 2 percent. Continuing 
claims fell by 8 percent. A Montana contact said that 
“many fear a better economy will exacerbate labor 
problems.” There were several notable layoff events, 
including one at a Minnesota manufacturer that cut 900 
workers. But sources suggested that job opportunities 
were available for those affected.   
Wage  pressures were moderate since the last report. A 
number of one-time bonuses were reported, stemming 
from recent changes in federal tax policy. Several 
contacts, including a Montana banker, also said raises 
were more likely because tax reform “provides a way to 
pay for increased wages” without increasing prices or 
reducing profits. A Minnesota construction contractor 
said wages “are going up because we are seeing an 
increase in productivity.” A Montana ski resort contact 
said that tax savings would allow the company to raise 
wages, and a Montana construction contact believed tax 
changes would provide a sizable, single-step increase in 
wages. However, a number of public union contracts—
covering South Dakota county employees, Minnesota 
and Wisconsin state employees, and higher education 
service workers in Minnesota—all settled for increases of 
2 percent or less.   
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate since the last report. 
About three-quarters of respondents to a January survey 
of firms from around the District reported that they 
expected the prices they charge for their products or 
services to increase only slightly or not at all in the next 
three months. Retail fuel prices in District states as of 
late February were slightly higher than in the previous 
reporting period. Building materials prices continued to 
increase faster than overall prices. Prices received by 
farmers for wheat, hay, hogs, cattle, chickens, and eggs 
increased in December compared with a year earlier; 
prices for corn, soybeans, milk, and turkeys decreased.  
 
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending grew modestly since the last report. 
Closures of big-box and other franchised retail stores 
continued across the District. A large salon franchise 
headquartered in Minnesota announced the closure of 
600 locations across the country. However, consumer 
spending has continued to grow. North Dakota sales tax 
revenue in January rose by 14 percent over a year 
earlier. Gross retail sales in South Dakota over the same 
period grew by 2 percent, though overall gross sales 
were much stronger, at 9 percent growth. Gross retail 
sales in Wisconsin were slightly higher since the last 
report.  
Tourism saw moderate growth, boosted by activity from 
the Super Bowl, hosted in Minneapolis in early February. 
Retailers, especially those in or near downtown, reported 
strong revenue, and hotels saw outsized gains for the 
period. Elsewhere, Montana snow conditions were good, 
and a resort said the number of skiers so far this season 
was ahead of last year’s record pace. A source in the 
Upper Peninsula of Michigan said that “things have been 
going well” for winter tourism so far, and February snow 
conditions in northern Wisconsin were reportedly 
excellent for snowmobiling, downhill skiing, and cross-
country skiing.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction saw strong growth since the 
last report. An industry report on January construction 
spending showed robust growth in District states 
compared with a year earlier, and every District state 
registered at least a small increase. Another industry 
database showed strong growth in new projects and total 
active projects over the first seven weeks of 2018 
compared with the same period a year earlier. 
Commercial permitting activity was higher in many of the 
District’s largest cities and particularly so in Sioux Falls 
and Rapid City, S.D. Residential construction was mixed; 
permit values were down in Minneapolis-St. Paul and 
Sioux Falls, but up in Billings, Mont., Rochester, Minn., 
and Rapid City. Total multifamily units permitted in 
January were lower than a year earlier.   
Commercial real estate grew moderately, remaining at 
strong levels in Minneapolis-St. Paul. Occupied retail 
space continued to expand, with vacancy rates hitting 
their low for the year in the fourth quarter, due in part to 
the Super Bowl. Multifamily construction, unit sales, and 
rent increases continued at a healthy pace in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, and an industry source said the 
market “defies gravity.” Construction of new industrial 
space also has been strong while vacancy rates 
remained stable. The office market was somewhat softer 
due to a trend in smaller corporate footprints, but overall 
vacancy has been mostly unchanged. Residential real 
estate fell moderately. January home sales were lower 
across most of the District, with the notable exception of 
northern Wisconsin, where an 18-county rural region 
posted a 6 percent increase in sales, continuing a 
persistent growth trend there.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased modestly since 
the last report. An index of manufacturing conditions 
indicated increased activity in January compared with a 
month earlier in Minnesota and South Dakota; the index 
for North Dakota indicated flat to slightly decreased 
activity. A major fertilizer plant began operations in North 
Dakota. A solar-panel producer announced an 
expansion at a facility in Minnesota. An appliance 
manufacturer announced that it will close a plant in 
Minnesota.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were stable at low levels. 
Respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s fourth quarter 
(January) survey of agricultural credit conditions 
indicated that farm income and capital spending 
decreased relative to a year earlier, with further declines 
expected for the coming three months. Most of the 
Dakotas and portions of Montana were experiencing 
below average snowfall over the winter, with concerns 
that drought conditions could persist into the spring 
planting season.  
Energy and mining activity increased briskly from the 
previous report. Oil and gas drilling in North Dakota and 
Montana as of mid-February increased from a month 
earlier, though cold weather slowed recent oil 
production. Contacts at nonferrous mines had a positive 
outlook, driven by increases in prices of gold, copper, 
and molybdenum. Development continued at a new 
copper mine in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula. Iron ore 
mines in northern Minnesota were operating at high 
capacity. Output from Wisconsin sand mines increased 
in recent months, due to greater demand from hydraulic 
fracturing. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District continued to increase at a modest pace in late January and February, and a 
faster pace of expansion was expected in the months ahead. Consumer spending picked up modestly, as growth in the 
retail and tourism sectors more than offset a decline in restaurant and auto sales. Manufacturing contacts reported 
moderate growth including an increase in production, shipments, new orders, order backlogs, and capital spending 
plans. Sales rose moderately at transportation, wholesale trade, and professional and high-tech firms, and further gains 
were anticipated in the months ahead. District real estate conditions expanded modestly as activity in both the residen-
tial and commercial sectors increased. Banking contacts reported steady loan demand, unchanged loan quality and 
credit conditions, and steady-to-decreasing deposits. Energy activity continued to grow a modest pace as production 
increased and the number of drilling rigs edged higher. Agricultural conditions across the District remained weak, and 
farm income fell further. Employment and employee hours rose modestly compared to the previous survey period. Wag-
es increased slightly in most sectors, and contacts expected stronger wage growth in the months ahead. Input and 
selling prices rose moderately, with stronger price gains in the retail sector.  
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours rose modestly 
in late January and February, and contacts expected 
further gains in the months ahead. Respondents in the 
retail trade, transportation, professional services, real 
estate, restaurant, tourism, and manufacturing sectors 
reported employment growth, while contacts in auto 
sales, wholesale trade, and health services noted a 
slight decline. However, employment exceeded year-ago 
levels in all sectors. Employee hours increased in most 
sectors, but declined modestly in the restaurant sector. 
Labor shortages were reported in the services sector 
including commercial drivers, skilled technicians, and 
salespeople.  
Wages picked up slightly in most sectors, and contacts 
anticipated moderate wage growth in the coming 
months.   
Prices  
Overall, input and selling prices increased moderately 
compared to the prior survey period, and additional 
moderate gains were expected in the months ahead. 
Retail contacts reported strong growth in input and sell-
ing prices and anticipated moderate increases moving 
forward. In the restaurant sector, input prices continued 
to rise slightly, while selling prices edged up after falling 
in the previous survey. Transportation contacts noted 
moderately higher input and selling prices and expected 
continued moderate growth in the coming months. Con-
struction prices rose moderately in late January and 
February after declining in the prior survey period. Prices 
for finished goods increased slightly and raw material 
costs rose moderately in the manufacturing industry. 
Manufacturers expected moderate price gains for both 
finished goods and raw materials in the next few months.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity picked up modestly in late 
January and February and was expected to increase 
further in the coming months. Retail sales increased at a 
moderate pace compared to the previous survey period 
and remained well above year-ago levels. Several retail-
ers noted an increase in sales for lower-priced items, 
while higher-priced products sold poorly. Contacts antici-
pated retail sales to continue to rise in the next few 
months, and inventory levels were expected to increase 
moderately. Auto sales fell modestly but were slightly 
above year-ago levels. Dealer contacts anticipated a 
moderate pickup in sales in the months ahead, and auto 
inventories were expected to increase heading forward. 
Restaurant sales declined moderately but were well 
above year-ago levels. Contacts expected a strong 
pickup in restaurant activity in the months ahead. District 
tourism activity increased moderately since the previous 
survey and was similar to year-ago levels. Tourism con-
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
tacts expected a strong increase in activity heading 
forward.    
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing and other business activity expanded at a 
moderate pace in late January and February. Manufac-
turers reported sustained growth in production, particu-
larly for metals, machinery, and plastics products. Ship-
ments, new orders, and order backlogs grew at a modest 
pace, and activity was higher than a year ago. Manufac-
turers’ capital spending plans rose moderately, and 
firms’ expectations for future activity remained strong.   
Outside of manufacturing, transportation, wholesale 
trade, and professional and high-tech firms reported 
moderate growth in sales. Heading forward, transporta-
tion and wholesale trade firms expected strong sales 
growth, while professional and high-tech firms anticipat-
ed a moderate sales increase in the next six months. All 
types of firms reported moderate growth in capital 
spending plans.  
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity increased at a modest pace in 
late January and February, and additional gains were 
expected moving into the spring months. Residential 
home sales and home prices rose moderately compared 
to the previous survey period, and inventories declined 
at a moderate pace. Sales of low- and medium-priced 
homes continued to outpace sales of higher-priced 
homes. Residential sales and home prices were antici-
pated to rise, while inventories were expected to fall 
further in the months ahead. Residential construction 
activity expanded slightly as home starts and traffic of 
potential buyers rose, while construction supply sales 
were flat. Commercial real estate activity increased 
modestly as absorption, completions, construction un-
derway, and sales increased, while vacancy rates de-
clined. Activity in the commercial real estate sector was 
expected to expand at a modest pace moving forward.  
Banking 
Bankers reported steady overall loan demand in late 
January and February. A majority of respondents indicat-
ed stable demand for commercial and industrial, residen-
tial real estate, and consumer installment loans. Demand 
for commercial real estate loans increased modestly, 
while contacts reported mixed demand for agricultural 
loans. Most bankers indicated loan quality was un-
changed compared to a year ago and expected loan 
quality to remain stable over the next six months. Credit 
standards remained largely unchanged in all major loan 
categories. Bankers reported steady-to-decreasing de-
posits.   
Energy 
Energy activity continued to grow at a modest pace over 
the last six weeks. The outlook remained positive and 
somewhat cautious given the recent slight decline in 
commodity prices. The number of active oil and gas rigs 
continued to edge higher, primarily in New Mexico and 
Wyoming. Oil and gas production also picked up in Colo-
rado’s Niobrara basin, and growth was expected to be 
driven by operators completing their drilled-but-
uncompleted (DUC) wells since the number of drilling 
rigs in the region remained relatively flat. In Oklahoma, 
natural gas activity continued to increase with the start of 
construction of a natural gas gathering system in the 
southeastern part of the state.  
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy remained weak, but 
farm real estate values slowed their decline from the 
previous months, providing some stability for farm fi-
nances. Farm income continued to decrease. Agricultur-
al credit conditions weakened further against year-ago 
levels, but at a more modest pace than in previous re-
porting periods. Although prices for most agricultural 
commodities increased slightly in February, prices for 
corn, soybeans and hogs were still lower than a year 
ago. Alongside an increase in cattle, wheat and cotton 
prices, farmland values declined only slightly and stabi-
lized significantly in the western portion of the District. 
Conditions in the farm economy in Oklahoma also im-
proved notably due to an increase in cotton acreage and 
a moderate increase in cotton revenues.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded at a moderate pace over the past six weeks. The manufacturing sector contin-
ued to expand robustly, energy activity increased, and home sales continued to rise. Growth slowed slightly in financial 
and nonfinancial services, while retail sales declined modestly. Hiring was strong across most sectors. Widespread 
reports of labor market tightness and difficulty finding qualified workers continued, and more firms responded by raising 
wages than in prior reporting periods. Price pressures remained elevated, and in some cases intensified. Outlooks 
remained broadly optimistic, although some uncertainty persisted. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment growth remained solid, and upward 
wage pressure increased somewhat. Hiring continued at 
a robust pace in manufacturing, services, and retail. 
Hiring in the energy sector has expanded so far in 2018, 
although numerous contacts noted a severe shortage of 
workers in West Texas, particularly for skilled positions. 
A lack of qualified candidates continued to challenge 
businesses in other sectors as well, with several reports 
that this lack of workers was inhibiting growth. Several 
contacts in construction-related industries noted further 
tightening in labor markets due to hurricane-related 
rebuilding. More firms said they raised wages to retain 
and/or attract workers than in the prior reporting period, 
particularly in the manufacturing, retail, and hospitality 
sectors. Energy contacts also noted an increase in wage 
pressure, for upstream jobs as well as for downstream 
construction labor. Also, a staffing firm noted that pay 
increases were fairly widespread among workers earning 
about $9 per hour.   
Looking ahead, firms were quite bullish on their hiring 
plans. More than half of the 362 firms responding to 
supplemental questions in the February Texas Business 
Outlook Surveys said they expect to increase their em-
ployment over the next six to twelve months, up roughly 
five percentage points from a year ago.  
Prices 
Price pressures remained elevated over the past six 
weeks, and a slightly faster pickup was seen in input 
prices. Transportation firms noted an increase in fuel 
costs, manufacturers noted increases in steel and petro-
leum product prices, and homebuilders said the price of 
some raw materials like lumber and concrete had risen. 
Selling prices increased at about the same pace as in 
the prior reporting period, although there was accelera-
tion in manufacturing finished goods prices.  
The average natural gas price over the reporting period 
was largely unchanged from the prior period despite 
some brief cold-weather-related increases, while the 
average WTI oil price was the highest it’s been since 
December 2014. The price of energy services continued 
to rise as drilling and well completion activity grew.  
Manufacturing  
Robust expansion in the manufacturing sector continued 
through February. Demand and output growth persisted, 
with a pickup in nondurables. Contacts noted strength in 
chemicals manufacturing in particular. One machinery 
manufacturer said business has been trending up over 
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
the past few months, with demand from the oil and gas 
sector playing a bigger role, and another said growth this 
year has been the best in the past five years. Outlooks 
overall remained highly positive, with contacts citing tax 
reform and a lower dollar as tailwinds, and rising interest 
rates and inflation as potential headwinds.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales fell slightly over the past six weeks, led by a 
decline in auto sales. Several contacts attributed some 
of the weakness to poor weather. One auto dealer noted 
that after several years of increases in sales volumes, a 
slight decrease is to be expected. For retailers more 
broadly, contacts noted a continued increase in internet 
sales. One wholesaler noted that their decrease in brick 
and mortar sales was offset by an increase in internet 
sales. Outlooks among retailers in general remained 
positive but were less optimistic than the prior reporting 
period. 
Nonfinancial Services 
The nonfinancial services sector continued to grow but at 
a slightly slower pace. The professional and business 
services industry was a bright spot, with revenue growth 
accelerating so far in 2018. Demand for staffing services 
generally increased and was broad-based, especially in 
Dallas and Houston. Transportation services also re-
mained strong—rail cargo volumes continued to in-
crease, and airline demand held steady at robust levels. 
Weakness was largely concentrated in leisure and hospi-
tality, although several contacts said the softness was 
largely due to colder-than-usual weather. Contacts in 
tourism areas along the Gulf Coast said business contin-
ues to struggle after the devastation of Hurricane Har-
vey. Overall, outlooks remained optimistic, although 
there was continued caution among transportation ser-
vices firms and others concerned about the outcome of 
international trade negotiations. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose over the reporting period, with contacts 
noting a good start to 2018. Home prices remained 
elevated, although contacts said it continued to be diffi-
cult to pass through further increases. Outlooks were 
positive, but there was concern among builders about 
margin compression and the potential impact of rising 
mortgage rates. 
The Dallas-Fort Worth office market remained in good 
shape. Contacts noted a decline in sublease space in 
Houston, but overall office market conditions continued 
to be weak. Industrial availability generally remained 
tight across major metropolitan areas. 
Financial Services 
Loan volumes and demand increased over the past six 
weeks, but at a slower pace compared to the previous 
reporting period. Volume growth was strongest for resi-
dential real estate loans and weakest for consumer 
loans. Interest rates charged on loans picked up, with 
more than 40 percent of bankers surveyed noting an 
increase over the past six weeks. Two-thirds of bankers 
reported an increase in cost of funds, up from the prior 
reporting period when half noted an increase. The vol-
ume of core deposits continued to rise, albeit at a signifi-
cantly slower pace than in the past several months. 
Credit standards and terms continued to tighten. Banking 
contacts remained optimistic, generally expecting strong-
er loan demand and increased business activity six 
months from now.  
Energy 
Energy activity was up from six weeks ago, as the rig 
count increased. New well completions also picked up, 
particularly in the Permian Basin. An oilfield services firm 
expects a further pickup in activity in the second quarter. 
Company outlooks remain relatively optimistic for 2018, 
with current oil prices at levels favorable for increasing 
production and employment.  
Agriculture 
Agricultural producers were concerned about worsening 
drought conditions. As of February 20, 70 percent of 
Texas was experiencing at least moderate drought, with 
some extreme drought in the High Plains and Panhan-
dle. However, rainstorms late in the reporting period 
likely alleviated the dry conditions in parts of the state. 
The cattle sector remained solid with strong demand for 
beef, both domestic and international, and rising cattle 
prices. However, the dairy industry continued to struggle 
with declining prices. Cotton acreage will likely be up in 
Texas this year, and there was excitement among pro-
ducers about cotton provisions being added back into 
the Farm Bill legislation. Financial concerns continued 
among grain farmers as they prepared for planting, with 
crop prices remaining low and some inflation seen in fuel 
and fertilizer costs. NAFTA renegotiations also remained 
a source of concern and uncertainty. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
January through late February. Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and upward wage pressures increased. 
Overall price inflation increased moderately. Sales of retail goods picked up slightly, and growth in consumer and busi-
ness services remained solid. Activity in the manufacturing sector continued to pick up, and conditions in the agriculture 
sector deteriorated modestly. Contacts reported that residential real estate market activity continued at a strong pace, 
and conditions in the commercial real estate sector were robust. Lending activity ticked up. 
 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and up-
ward wage pressures increased over the reporting peri-
od. Contacts noted labor shortages in various sectors, 
especially for high-skilled positions. Across the District, 
contacts reported difficulty finding workers experienced 
in information technology, accounting, and finance. To 
attract stronger job candidates, some contacts in Seattle 
and the Mountain West increased nonwage compensa-
tion, including vacation time and stock grants. A banking 
contact observed moderate wage growth for entry-level 
positions to increase retention. Contacts in the health 
insurance sector increased their use of offshore labor 
and automation in response to tight labor market condi-
tions. Minimum wage laws continued to put upward 
pressure on labor costs generally. A utility provider in 
Southern California reported flat employment growth in 
the industry because of muted sales activity.  
Prices  
Overall price inflation increased moderately around the 
District. Continued strength in construction activity drove 
an increase in price growth for various building materials. 
A health-care provider in the Mountain West reported a 
jump in insurance premiums, partly due to a reduction in 
federal subsidies for low-income families. Decreased 
competition from abroad and solid domestic and interna-
tional demand sustained elevated steel prices. Contacts 
in Idaho noted that animal health product businesses 
were able to pass on increased shipping costs to cus-
tomers. Declines in input costs put downward pressure 
on electricity prices. Agricultural commodity prices de-
creased moderately due to excess supply. 
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods picked up slightly over the reporting 
period. Contacts in the Mountain West saw stronger-than
-expected sales in furniture and home entertainment 
equipment. A contact in the food and beverage industry 
reported solid sales. While automotive sales remained 
elevated, growth over the reporting period was flat. Un-
seasonably warm weather throughout the District re-
strained winter clothing and equipment sales.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
remained solid. A major health insurance provider in 
Utah reported an uptick in enrollment and ample capaci-
ty for further growth. Demand for health-care services 
increased slightly. Demand for business services in 
California’s entertainment sector increased due to favor-
able state tax incentives. Restaurants continued to expe-
rience a decline in foot traffic. 
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector continued to pick up. 
A contact in the Mountain West noted that strong de-
mand for microchips boosted production and caused 
some longer wait times for deliveries. Capacity utilization 
in the steel sector grew at a solid pace, driven by re-
The Beige Book ■ February 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
duced overseas competition. Contacts in Washington 
noted that new orders for commercial aircraft were 
steady. Profitability in the aerospace sector increased, 
partly due to a pickup in sales of military aircraft and 
systems.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
On balance, conditions in the agriculture sector deterio-
rated modestly. Low snow and rainfall over the reporting 
period limited new planting in Central California and 
resulted in weak crop yields. Contacts in Idaho noted 
that excess supply drove a decline in dairy sector profits 
to breakeven levels, with smaller producers being hit 
particularly hard. Grain inventories in the Mountain West 
were at record levels. Conditions in the swine industry 
continued to improve on a year-over-year basis. In-
creased global demand for beef products boosted feed-
lot utilization.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets continued at a strong 
pace. Construction activity in the residential market 
moderated slightly, limited by persistent labor shortages 
and increasing material costs. Contacts in Eastern 
Washington observed a notable decline in permits and 
starts for single-family and duplex dwellings. In Hawaii, 
housing development starts declined, and several pro-
jects were scaled back as prices for building materials 
increased. In Idaho, construction of residential properties 
grew at a fast pace. Throughout the District, low con-
struction starts and resale volumes kept residential pric-
es elevated over the reporting period. Contacts in North-
ern California reported rising home prices stemming from 
strengthening demand. Brisk demand from out-of-state 
buyers drove price increases in Oregon. Commercial 
real estate activity also continued at a strong pace. 
Large transportation infrastructure projects drove con-
struction activity in Southern California. In Eastern Ore-
gon, demand for warehouse and distribution sites was 
robust. Contacts in Washington noted an increase in the 
demand for warehouse space due to the expanding 
marijuana industry, which drove up industrial rents.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked up over the reporting period. Loan 
demand was mixed but increased slightly overall. Con-
tacts in Oregon noted that increased commercial real 
estate development drove growth in loan demand. In 
Central California, however, loan demand slowed mod-
estly, leading to a slight loosening of lending standards. 
Across the District, interest margins widened slightly, 
though they remained narrow due in part to robust com-
petition. In Eastern Washington, venture capital lending 
registered a slight pickup. ■ 


