The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
September 4th, 2019 
August 2019 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta based 
on information collected on or before August 23, 2019. This document 
summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal 
Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal 
Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
On balance, reports from Federal Reserve Districts suggested that the economy expanded at a modest pace through 
the end of August. Although concerns regarding tariffs and trade policy uncertainty continued, the majority of business-
es remained optimistic about the near-term outlook. Reports on consumer spending were mixed, although auto sales 
for most Districts grew at a modest pace. Tourism activity since the previous report remained solid in most reporting 
Districts. On balance, transportation activity softened, which some reporting Districts attributed to slowing global de-
mand and heightened trade tensions. Home sales remained constrained in the majority of Districts due primarily to low 
inventory levels, and new home construction activity remained flat. Commercial real estate construction and sales 
activity were steady, while the pace of leasing increased slightly over the prior period. Overall manufacturing activity 
was down slightly from the previous report. Among reporting Districts, agricultural conditions remained weak as a result 
of unfavorable weather conditions, low commodity prices, and trade-related uncertainties. Lending volumes grew mod-
estly across several Districts. Reports on activity in the nonfinancial services sector were positive, with reporting Dis-
tricts noting similar or improved activity from the last report. 
Employment and Wages 
Overall, Districts indicated that employment grew at a modest pace, on par with the previous reporting period. While 
employment growth varied by industry, some Districts noted manufacturing employment was flat to down. Firms and 
staffing agencies universally cited tightness across various labor market segments and skill levels, which continued to 
constrain growth in overall business activity. On balance, Districts reported that the pace of wage growth remained 
modest to moderate, similar to the previous reporting period. Districts continued to report strong upward pressure on 
pay for entry-level and low-skill workers, as well as for technology, construction, and some professional services posi-
tions. In addition to wage increases, some Districts noted other efforts—such as enhanced benefits offerings, work 
arrangement flexibility, and signing bonuses—to attract and retain employees. 
Prices 
On net, Districts indicated modest price increases since the last report.  Retailers and manufacturers in some Districts 
reported slight increases in input costs. Although firms in some Districts noted an ability to pass along price increases, 
manufacturers relayed limited ability to raise prices. District reports on the impact of tariffs on pricing were mixed, with 
some Districts anticipating that the effects would not be felt for a few months. 
Boston 
Economic activity expanded at a modest pace since the 
last Beige Book report, although some manufacturers 
saw declines while tourism and the staffing sector report-
ed strength. Commercial real estate markets strength-
ened on balance. Residential real estate inventories 
were down and contacts noted bidding wars. 
New York 
Regional economic growth continued at a modest pace. 
Job creation was sluggish, but labor markets remained 
tight and wage growth picked up a bit. Prices continued 
to rise modestly. Manufacturing activity picked up slight-
ly. Residential rental markets firmed. Banks reported a 
rebound in loan demand, but the financial sector overall 
showed signs of softening. 
Philadelphia 
On balance, business activity continued at a modest 
pace of growth during the current Beige Book period. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

2 
National Summary 
Contacts continued to report difficulty in finding qualified 
labor, and wage increases remained moderate. Still, 
inflation remained modest. Firms remained positive 
about the six-month outlook, although some expressed 
more caution given uncertainty.  
Cleveland 
On balance, economic activity was steady over the 
period. Consumer spending picked up, while manufac-
turing and freight activity slowed down. Employment 
remained stable overall, while wages rose moderately 
across the board. Prices were little changed, with con-
tacts citing as contributing factors a lack of materials cost 
inflation, intense competition, and softening demand. 
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy continued to grow at a mod-
est rate. Manufacturers and trucking companies saw 
some declines in shipments. Ports, tourism, and nonfi-
nancial service firms generally indicated increasing 
activity. Residential and commercial real estate markets 
were stable to improving modestly. Labor markets re-
mained tight, wages rose modestly, and prices increased 
at a moderate rate. 
Atlanta 
Economic activity moderated slightly over the reporting 
period. Labor market tightness persisted. Wage growth 
remained steady and input costs rose slightly. Retail 
sales and tourism activity were mixed. Real estate sales 
and construction were down from a year ago. Manufac-
turing activity softened. Banking conditions remained 
steady. 
Chicago 
Economic activity increased slightly. Consumer spending 
increased modestly; employment and business spending 
increased slightly; and manufacturing and construction 
and real estate were little changed. Wages and prices 
rose slightly. Financial conditions were little changed on 
balance. Farm income prospects improved some, but 
remained poor for most agriculture sectors. 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions were unchanged from our previous 
report. Construction activity ticked up. Barge traffic con-
tinued to improve, but air cargo traffic decreased slightly 
from a year ago. Farming conditions remain strained by 
low commodity prices and residual effects from flooding 
in the spring. Overall, contacts’ economic outlook for the 
remainder of the year turned slightly pessimistic. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District activity was steady overall. Labor demand 
remained healthy but employment was flat, as labor 
availability continued to constrain hiring. Manufacturing 
grew slightly, but contacts pointed to some signs of 
softening. Agricultural conditions remained weak due to 
poor weather during planting, while commercial con-
struction grew strongly as firms caught up with a backlog 
caused by the slow start to the season. 
Kansas City 
District economic activity edged up in July and early 
August. Consumer spending increased modestly, with 
gains in retail, auto, restaurant and tourism sales. Real 
estate activity also expanded, but residential construc-
tion activity slowed. Manufacturing activity declined 
slightly, while activity held steady in the energy sector. 
The agricultural sector remained weak, with low prices 
and trade uncertainty weighing on farm income. 
Dallas 
Economic activity continued to expand moderately. 
Retail sales were flat and drilling activity dipped, but 
output growth strengthened in manufacturing. Selling 
price increases were modest, as most firms were limited 
in their ability to pass through higher costs. Hiring contin-
ued at a steady pace. Outlooks were mixed, with tariffs, 
trade tensions, stock market volatility, and slowing global 
growth driving up uncertainty. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. The labor market remained 
tight and wage growth was moderate. Price inflation was 
largely stable. Sales of retail goods increased notably, as 
did activity in the consumer and business services sec-
tors. The manufacturing and agricultural sectors slowed 
somewhat. Activity in residential and commercial real 
estate markets expanded moderately, and lending grew 
further. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Most First District business contacts reported modest revenue growth in the second quarter and into the summer 
months, but some retailers, hotels, and manufacturers cited stronger sales growth and a couple of manufacturers said 
revenue was down from a year earlier. Tariffs and general trade uncertainty continued to be mentioned as risk factors. 
Staffing firms were more upbeat than three months ago, reporting improvements in the pace of revenue growth. Com-
mercial real estate markets also improved somewhat, with Boston continuing to be the strongest area. Residential real 
estate market activity moderated during the summer months. While some firms mentioned raising wages somewhat to 
attract and keep employees, most said the labor market was steady. Outlooks ranged from guardedly optimist to gener-
ally positive. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets were reportedly not much changed from 
the last report. One fast-growing retailer reported a 
successful on-campus recruiting push, filling technical 
and other jobs and raising wages to do so. Another 
retailer continued to cite little difficulty hiring sales peo-
ple. Manufacturing respondents, with one exception, 
reported no major revisions to their hiring plans. The 
exception was a semiconductor-related firm facing sales 
declines, who said they would probably start layoffs 
within six to eight weeks. Staffing firms said the number 
of job requests overall remained strong for both tempo-
rary and permanent openings. Most staffing contacts 
reported stable bill and pay rates, but two firms in-
creased both rates by low single-digit percentages. 
Prices  
Contacts said very little about prices. Retailers noted no 
price concerns. Tariffs continued to be a minor but per-
sistent pricing issue for manufacturers; firms generally 
tried to pass price increases on to buyers and reported 
success most of the time. Aside from tariffs, manufactur-
ers reported no unusual pricing pressure. 
Retail and Tourism 
First District retail respondents this round reported com-
parable-store sales increases ranging from flat to up by 
mid-single digit percentages or higher year-over-year. 
Some contacts said results exceeded their expectations, 
while others cited July sales a little slower than anticipat-
ed. One explanation was a slowdown in getting products 
from non-Chinese Asian manufacturers, as the ports in 
these countries were said to be not yet able to handle 
the increased shipping demand. The retail outlook for the 
rest of the year is largely positive. 
An automotive industry contact in Connecticut reported 
that sales through June were up slightly from the first 
quarter. Dealers were selling more used cars than new 
models, with consumer credit readily available for financ-
ing either new or used vehicles. The contact argued that 
imposing additional tariffs on China would have a dispro-
portionately adverse effect on U.S. autos.  
A travel industry contact reported that Boston hotel  
room demand increased 3.2 percent in June over last 
year, and that the average room rate was 4.2 percent 
higher. Boston hoteliers said they were happy with the 
summer tourism season to date, as strong business and 
leisure travel kept room demand high. Year-to-date 
through June, average room revenue for Boston hotels 
was up 6.9 percent, compared with the national average 
of 3.3 percent. These mid-year results and anecdotal 
reports through mid-August lead the tourism industry to 
expect 2019 revenues to be up solidly over 2018. 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Reports from manufacturing contacts continued to be 
mixed. Three of the nine firms contacted this round are 
in the semiconductor industry; two reported sales de-
clines versus the same period a year earlier, including 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
one with a 20 percent drop. Several contacts in other 
industries reported that growth, while still positive, was 
slower than in earlier periods. A manufacturer of electri-
cal equipment attributed some of its slowdown to lower 
energy prices reducing demand from energy extraction 
firms. An aerospace firm which supplies parts to 
Boeing’s 737 MAX aircraft indicated that that aircraft’s 
well-publicized problems had not translated into lower 
sales yet. A manufacturer of dairy products said demand 
for their products was the strongest in a long time.  
No contacts reported significant revisions to capital 
expenditure plans. One respondent in the electrical 
equipment business said that the tariffs had led them to 
invest more in automating factories in the U.S. as op-
posed to moving them to Mexico.  
Outside of the semiconductor industry, the outlook re-
mained generally positive for most contacts. Many con-
tinued to mention trade tensions as an issue.  
Staffing Services 
New England staffing firms reported positive revenue 
trends for the second quarter of 2019. All firms cited 
improved growth rates compared to the previous quarter, 
with rates as high as 20 percent quarter-over-quarter. 
Two mentioned that their business results were among 
the top five performing firms in their respective region. 
On the other hand, scarce labor supply continues to be 
the most challenging issue among staffing businesses. 
Several respondents noted difficulty in matching the skill 
sets job seekers possessed with those desired by em-
ployers. Consequently, companies wanting to hire have 
been accepting less qualified workers and offering higher 
pay rates. Staffing firms mentioned aggressive use of 
online recruiting job boards and offering competitive 
rates and benefits to candidates. With unemployment 
low and labor supply limited, staffing respondents cited a 
guardedly optimistic outlook. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District 
strengthened somewhat overall, but differences in per-
formance across geographic submarkets persisted. The 
Boston area saw robust leasing demand in both the 
office and industrial sectors. Class A office rents in prime 
Boston locations increased substantially in the past six 
months, and the office vacancy rate, at roughly 8 per-
cent, was said by one contact to be at an all-time low. 
Industrial rents in Boston climbed 6 percent to 10 per-
cent over the year as e-commerce users competed 
fiercely for scarce warehouse space. Construction activi-
ty held steady in the Boston area; in recent months, the 
share of office construction has risen relative to apart-
ments.  
In the Providence area, industrial leasing activity re-
mained robust, exceeding expectations, and two-year 
rent growth in that market was estimated at 33 percent. 
Office leasing in Providence softened and office asking 
rents were stable despite a vacancy uptick; a contact 
expects effective rents to soften moving forward. In 
greater Hartford, leasing activity for both office and in-
dustrial space was described as very slow but stable.  
Investment sales were slow across the District. Contacts 
expect sales to resume in the fall, with the potential for 
increased demand following declines in long-term Treas-
ury yields and increasingly favorable borrowing condi-
tions. Concerning the outlook, contacts see no risks of 
overbuilding or overleverage in commercial property in 
the District. In Boston, the lack of profitability of high-tech 
firms occupying large blocks of space was cited as a risk 
factor. Otherwise, respondents expect stable activity.  
Residential Real Estate 
Activity in residential real estate markets in the First 
District moderated in June or July following strong sales 
results in May. (Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and 
Maine reported year-over-year changes from July 2018 
to July 2019, while Massachusetts, Vermont, and Great-
er Boston reported statistics through June. Connecticut 
statistics were unavailable.) For single family homes, 
closed sales decreased moderately from a year earlier in 
Massachusetts, Boston, and New Hampshire, and in-
creased in Rhode Island and Maine. Median sales prices 
rose and inventory declined in all reporting areas. In 
particular, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and New 
Hampshire experienced double-digit inventory drops 
over the year. For condos, closed sales were down and 
prices were up in all areas except Maine. Condo invento-
ries improved in Maine, Massachusetts, and Boston, and 
decreased sharply in New Hampshire and Rhode Island. 
In Vermont, closed sales and inventory dropped for 
single family homes and condos combined. 
Contacts expressed a positive near-term outlook, citing 
persistent high demand and low interest rates as rea-
sons. However, contacts voiced affordability concerns as 
intense bidding and multiple offers still prevail.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional‐economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Second District economy continued to expand at a modest pace in the latest reporting period. The labor market 
remained very tight, as employment levels were flat, and wage growth picked up slightly. Input price pressures have 
remained subdued, while selling prices have been flat to up moderately. Manufacturing activity was steady to slightly 
higher, while trade and distribution activity was mixed. However, most service sectors saw steady to modestly growing 
activity. Consumer spending was up modestly, largely reflecting a pickup in auto sales. Tourism has picked up noticea-
bly. Housing markets have been mixed, though the residential rental market has firmed throughout the District. Com-
mercial real estate markets have been steady to softer, and new commercial construction has tapered off somewhat. 
Finally, banks reported a rebound in loan demand, though the financial sector overall showed signs of softening.    
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained very tight across the 
District. Contacts have continued to report trouble finding 
qualified workers in a wide variety of roles, including 
engineers, teachers, construction workers, truck drivers, 
and retail clerks. An employment agency noted that one 
factor holding back hiring has been a wide gap between 
job candidates’ salary demands and employers’ offers.    
Businesses in most industries continued to report little or 
no net hiring. Contacts in the manufacturing, transporta-
tion, information, finance, and professional & business 
services sectors reported flat to slightly declining staffing 
levels, while businesses in education & health, real 
estate, and leisure & hospitality reported modest increas-
es in headcounts. The one industry noting fairly brisk net 
hiring has been wholesale trade. Looking ahead to the 
next six months, though, businesses in manufacturing 
and most service sectors still plan on adding to staff.  
While businesses generally report that wage growth has 
remained moderate, there have been scattered signs of 
a pickup. A large New York City employment agency 
notes somewhat more upward pressure on salaries, and 
a finance sector contact in upstate New York notes that 
they recently upped pay scales for entry-level workers in 
response to the tight labor market.              
Prices  
Overall, businesses indicated that both input costs and 
selling prices continued to rise at a modest pace, though 
there have been some divergent trends across indus-
tries. Manufacturers report that their input prices have 
continued to rise at a modest pace but that their selling 
prices have flattened out. Looking ahead, an increasingly 
large share of manufacturers said that they expect their 
input costs to rise faster than the prices they receive. 
Contacts in the service sector, on the other hand, report-
ed ongoing growth in their selling prices—particularly in 
the transportation and education & health industries—
along with continued moderate growth in input prices.  
Retailers generally indicated that selling prices have 
been mostly flat to down slightly, reflecting somewhat 
steeper discounting. Contacts in both auto sales and 
retail indicated that trade tensions have not yet had a 
noticeable effect on prices. In contrast, a major retail 
chain noted that they had raised prices on furniture and 
other big-ticket items, but that they were likely to reverse 
those hikes, as consumers were not responding well.  
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales remained steady in recent weeks and flat to 
up slightly from a year earlier. A major retailer noted 
some slowing in sales in early August (partly reflecting 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
tariff-driven price hikes), but the advent of back-to-school 
season has mitigated that decline. An upstate New York 
mall reported continued modest growth in sales activity 
and shopper traffic. In general, inventories were said to 
be near desired levels, helped by increased discounting 
over the summer.  
Sales of both new and used vehicles picked up noticea-
bly, according to dealers in upstate New York. Still, 
inventories of new vehicles remained above desired 
levels. Dealers indicated that service departments have 
remained busy and characterized consumer credit condi-
tions as being in good shape.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
The manufacturing and distribution sectors have im-
proved somewhat since the last report. Manufacturers 
reported that overall activity and new orders have been 
steady to slightly higher in the latest reporting period, 
after a pullback during the late spring. Wholesale distrib-
utors reported that growth rebounded to a fairly brisk 
pace. However, transportation firms noted a moderate 
drop-off in activity in recent weeks.  
While manufacturers remain fairly positive about the 
near-term outlook, wholesale distributors and especially 
transportation firms have become noticeably less opti-
mistic. Contacts in these sectors, as well as in manufac-
turing, have expressed ongoing concern about tariffs and 
trade tensions and about uncertainty going forward.  
Services 
Service-sector businesses reported that activity has 
been mixed but, on balance, a bit stronger since the last 
report. Contacts in leisure & hospitality noted a substan-
tial pickup in business. An authority on New York City’s 
tourism industry reported that visitations picked up and 
were strong in August but that visitors were spending 
less, on average. Broadway theaters reported that at-
tendance slipped somewhat in July and early August and 
was down modestly from a year ago. Hotel occupancy 
rates were solid, though average room rates were down 
due to more people staying at budget hotels.  
Other service industries have not been as robust. Busi-
nesses engaged in professional & business services and 
education & health reported modest growth in activity, 
while finance and real estate firms generally reported flat 
activity. Contacts in the information sector reported some 
pullback in activity. Service firms, in general, were fairly 
optimistic about the near-term outlook, except for those 
in the finance sector.            
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have firmed some-
what since the last report, with the rental market 
strengthening but the sales market mixed. The market 
for existing homes in upstate New York has continued to 
strengthen, as persistently low inventories of unsold 
homes has continued to boost prices and contributed to 
bidding wars. In New York City, by contrast, the invento-
ry of unsold co-ops and condos has hovered at a 7-year 
high, though not excessively high by historical standards. 
Apartment sales prices have drifted down, and transac-
tions activity has retreated from brisk second-quarter 
levels. Housing markets in the areas surrounding New 
York City have been mixed.  
Residential rents have accelerated somewhat across the 
District and are now up 3-6 percent from a year earlier. 
Rental vacancy rates have declined further, particularly 
in New York City, and landlord concessions have contin-
ued to recede from the high levels of recent years.  
Commercial real estate markets across the District have 
been steady to softer since the last report. Office rents 
have been mostly flat, while availability rates have been 
steady to slightly higher. Industrial markets have been 
mixed, as rents have continued to rise moderately, while 
availability rates have edged up further. The market for 
retail space has been particularly soft, with availability 
rates climbing to multi-year highs and rents declining 
modestly. 
New multi-family construction starts have tapered off a 
bit, but ongoing construction has remained fairly brisk 
across the New York City area. New office construction 
has been steady, while new industrial construction has 
slowed somewhat. There has been quite extensive new 
hotel development in New York City’s outer boroughs.   
Banking and Finance 
Bankers reported higher demand for consumer loans, 
residential mortgages, and commercial mortgages, all of 
which had declined in the previous reporting period. 
Refinancing activity rose. Credit standards for consumer 
loans, residential mortgages, and C&I loans were un-
changed, but tightening standards were reported for 
commercial mortgages. Bankers reported narrowing loan 
spreads across all categories. Finally, delinquency rates 
were reported to be stable across all categories. ■  
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, aggregate Third District business activity continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige 
Book period. Manufacturing accelerated to a moderate pace of growth, and nonmanufacturing, nonauto retail sales, and 
tourism continued at a modest pace of growth. Sales for new autos as well as commercial real estate construction and 
leasing continued to decline slightly. Homebuilding softened somewhat, and existing home sales declined further. Wage 
increases remained moderate, as the labor market remained tight. Overall, price pressures remained modest. The firms’ 
outlook for growth over the next six months remained positive, with about half of all firms anticipating increases in gen-
eral activity and less than one-fifth expecting decreases. However, contacts noted a slightly more cautious outlook given 
trade and market uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. More than one-fourth of 
all firms reported increases in staff, similar to the previ-
ous period, however, the share of manufacturers report-
ing decreases rose. Average work hours were little 
changed across firms over the period.  
Contacts continued to report that tight labor market 
conditions were constraining growth, as many noted 
difficulty in finding qualified workers for needed positions 
in various sectors. Staffing firms reported continued 
struggles in finding qualified candidates, with one firm 
describing the labor pool in its area as “nearly nonexist-
ent.”  
Wage growth continued at a moderate pace, with con-
tacts reporting wage increases ranging from above 3 
percent to above 5 percent on a year-over-year basis. 
The share of nonmanufacturing contacts who reported 
increases in wage and benefit costs edged down below 
45 percent; only 1 percent reported decreases. Several 
contacts reported no change or a leveling-off in wages 
from the prior period.  
Prices  
The firms reported overall modest increases for both 
input prices and prices received for their own goods and 
services. The share of nonmanufacturing firms reporting 
increases in prices rose, while the share of manufactur-
ing firms reporting increases held mostly steady. Rough-
ly two-thirds to three-quarters of firms reported no 
change in prices over the period. Most banking contacts 
continued to note no signs of inflation.  
Looking ahead six months, manufacturers continued to 
anticipate higher prices for inputs and for their own 
goods, on balance. The percentage of manufacturing 
firms that expect to pay higher prices for inputs rose to 
above 45 percent, and the share expecting to receive 
higher prices for their own goods increased to almost 35 
percent.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturers reported moderate growth in 
activity – a pickup from the slight pace of growth during 
the prior period. Indexes for shipments and unfilled or-
ders remained above long-term nonrecession averages, 
and the new orders index improved to an above-average 
level as well.  
The makers of lumber products, chemicals, and fabricat-
ed metal products noted gains in new orders and ship-
ments since the prior period. The primary metal and 
industrial machinery producers reported little change, 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
and the makers of electronic products noted declines. 
These trends were somewhat weaker this year com-
pared with the same period one year ago for most of the 
sectors.  
Manufacturers’ expectations of activity over the next six 
months improved somewhat. Expectations of shipments 
and of new orders were above long-term nonrecession 
averages, with the latter rising above average over the 
period. Expectations of future employment and planned 
capital spending also remained above average but were 
little changed. Some firms reported that uncertainty 
continued to hamper their investment decisions.  
Consumer Spending 
Contacts for malls and convenience stores continued to 
report modest growth in nonauto retail sales, on balance. 
Some mall store operators reported modest increases in 
year-over-year sales and foot traffic. Convenience store 
contacts continued to report strong sales.  
Sales of new autos continued to show signs of slowing 
but remained near high levels. Pennsylvania dealers 
reported moderate year-over-year growth through July 
for both new and used cars and noted recent weakness 
in new car sales. In New Jersey, early estimates by 
dealers indicated modest declines in year-over-year 
sales for July and August, following weak sales in June. 
One contact cited weakening consumer confidence and 
rising new car prices as contributing factors.  
Tourism activity continued to grow at a modest pace. 
One contact noted that the Jersey shore season has 
been fine, with high occupancy, and that restaurants and 
other retail are performing well. Casino revenues in 
Atlantic City were up modestly. Occupancy rates recov-
ered in the Poconos for the summer season following 
softness earlier in the year. Hotel demand in the Greater 
Philadelphia market was generally in line with the prior 
period but slowed somewhat, partly owing to shorter 
booking windows for business travel.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, activity at service-sector firms continued at 
a modest pace of growth. The percentage of firms re-
porting increases in current revenues rose, although the 
percentage reporting increases in new orders fell. 
Roughly one-half of firms expect growth over the next six 
months, unchanged over the period. One large firm 
noted that it had a modestly more conservative outlook 
and that it was cutting back on capital spending a bit 
because of recent uncertainty. 
 
 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported continued moderate growth in 
both overall loan volumes (excluding credit cards) and 
credit card lending on a year-over-year basis.  
During the current period (reported without seasonal 
adjustments), volumes appeared to grow robustly in 
home mortgages and auto lending. Commercial and 
industrial loans grew moderately, as did other consumer 
loans (not elsewhere classified). Home equity lines de-
clined modestly.  
Banking contacts continued to note increased uncertain-
ty, but while some contacts reported that businesses 
were hanging on the sidelines or hitting pause, other 
contacts have not seen customers holding off on making 
investments. Contacts generally remained optimistic for 
the remainder of 2019, although somewhat less so than 
in the prior period.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported a modest decrease in contract 
signings in the current period, down from the prior peri-
od. Contacts noted some strength in southern New 
Jersey housing markets across most price ranges but a 
slowing in traffic and sales at all price points in central 
Pennsylvania.  
Existing home sales declined moderately on a year-over-
year basis – a larger decline than in the prior period –
across most local markets. Low inventories continued to 
limit sales in all markets. A large Philadelphia broker 
noted a slight boost in refinancing activity following the 
FOMC’s rate cut.  
On balance, commercial real estate construction and 
leasing activity continued to pull back from relatively high 
levels. Contacts noted that fundamentals in larger mar-
kets seemed sound. Office and industrial markets were 
characterized by relatively even to positive net absorp-
tion, stable vacancy rates, and incremental rent growth.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the District was steady on balance. Retailers reported modestly improving sales over the period. 
Real estate agents also saw increased home sales, including a pickup in the first-time-buyers segment. Bankers report-
ed firm consumer lending as lower interest rates drove mortgage and auto loans, but they reported softening commer-
cial loans. Manufacturers saw weaker demand because uncertainty led their customers to delay capital expenditures. In 
addition, factory inventories were elevated as sales fell more than anticipated. Freight volumes decreased. Overall 
District employment remained relatively steady, with little change in most sectors. Wages rose moderately across indus-
try sectors and occupational categories. Prices were little changed in general in the District. However, many contacts 
expected input costs to rise in the near future, in part because of anticipated new tariffs. 
Employment and Wages  
Total employment was steady in the District, although 
reports on hiring varied by industry. Professional and 
business services firms continued to hire to keep up with 
strong demand. A few construction contractors added 
professional or field staff, but the majority did not. One 
contractor commented, “experienced staff can handle 
the expected volume.” Most freight haulers did not ex-
pand their payrolls although turnover remained high. 
Retailers generally held headcounts steady outside of 
typical seasonal variations. Meanwhile, factories tried to 
align their labor needs with slower sales. Generally, 
manufacturers did not lay off workers, but several imple-
mented other labor-reducing measures such as fewer 
shifts, reduced overtime, fewer temporary employees, 
and shrinkage by attrition.  
Overall wage growth increased slightly to a moderate 
pace in recent weeks, with modest to moderate growth in 
most sectors. Retailers, bankers, and staffing agencies 
reported strong upward pressure on entry-level wages. 
One staffing executive commented that many clients 
were raising entry-level wages, and that it is “very 
strange to see a client offering the [state] minimum 
wage.” Stiff competition for skilled workers led to higher 
wages in manufacturing, construction, and professional 
and business services. A manufacturer said that wages 
were still rising because “despite demand shortfalls, the 
employment market remains tight.” A nonresidential 
contractor paid midyear bonuses to his workers, a move 
atypical for the firm. In contrast, freight haulers saw 
slower wage growth because weaker demand reduced 
firms’ ability to raise wages. 
Prices  
Prices were little changed on net, though there were 
small changes in a few sectors. Several manufacturers 
cut their selling prices because of downward pressure 
from weakening global demand. First, weakening de-
mand contributed to falling commodities prices to which 
many manufacturers’ contracts were indexed. Second, it 
led to stiff competition for contracts among global manu-
facturers. Freight haulers indicated that excess shipping 
capacity eroded their pricing power. Most retailers held 
prices steady. Professional and business services firms 
reported no pricing power because of slower demand 
growth and strong competition in the sector. A few non-
residential contractors were able to raise prices (and 
margins) because of persistently strong demand, but 
residential contractors felt buyers’ concerns about afford-
ability meant they were unable to raise prices. Contacts 
The Beige Book ■ September 2019 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
across sectors expected input costs to rise in the future, 
largely because they anticipated more tariffs. 
Consumer Spending 
Reports indicated that retail spending increased modest-
ly in recent weeks. Food retailers said that a typical 
increase in demand for seasonal products and the start 
of the back-to-school selling season boosted sales. By 
contrast, apparel retailers indicated activity was relatively 
flat in recent weeks, although some were optimistic that 
sales would increase in the near future. Auto dealers 
reported solid sales in July, with one noting that “lease 
returns and incentives have bolstered sales.”  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity declined modestly as demand 
continued to soften across end markets. Several con-
tacts reported that both they and their customers had 
delayed capital spending as trade tensions and related 
uncertainty clouded their outlooks. Additionally, respond-
ents noted that weakening demand abroad pushed down 
prices and intensified competition with foreign manufac-
turers who were looking for new markets in which to sell 
their products. Capacity utilization declined, but some 
manufacturers indicated that this was a return to normal 
following more than a year of hectic activity. Several 
contacts reported that inventory levels were elevated 
because demand fell more sharply than anticipated. 
Looking forward, reports were mixed: some manufactur-
ers believed that orders would improve in the fourth 
quarter and beyond, while others expected demand to 
weaken further. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Overall, construction and real estate activity was steady. 
On the nonresidential side, builders continued to report 
stable and strong demand. New projects came from 
multiple sectors. Backlogs remained strong. One nonres-
idential contractor described current conditions as 
“smooth sailing.” Nonresidential builders were confident 
that demand would remain stable and strong through 
2019 and into 2020.  
On the residential side, homebuilders noted slightly 
weaker demand, but real estate agents reported stronger 
sales volume. Some homebuilders indicated that the 
slowdown may have been because of homebuyers’ less 
optimistic views of the broader economy. By contrast, 
realtors said that sales volume increased because of a 
typical seasonal pickup and lower mortgage interest 
rates. They also reported that homeownership rates 
were rising as low mortgage interest rates, stronger 
household formation, and rising rents spurred demand 
among first-time buyers. 
Financial Services 
Bankers reported that loan demand declined slightly. In 
general, demand from commercial clients softened. 
Consumer lending held firm, as lower interest rates 
bolstered demand for mortgages and auto loans. Bank-
ers would like to decrease deposit rates to offset declin-
ing lending rates, but many reported that competition for 
deposits remained too intense to reduce these rates. 
Overall, core deposits increased on balance.  
Professional and Business Services 
Activity in professional and business services remained 
solid, but growth softened since the previous report. 
Consulting firms reported strong activity and generally 
indicated that their smaller, local clients had a solid 
pipeline of projects. By contrast, technology firms sug-
gested that activity was flat or down slightly. One tech-
nology contact reported softening demand from clients in 
Asia, and another noted an overall reduction in the vol-
ume of large-scale deals.  
Freight 
Freight volumes softened further since the previous 
report. One freight executive summarized the sector by 
saying, "freight volumes are down in most channels. It is 
not clear how much of this is related to the surge of last 
year wearing off and how much is associated with cur-
rent demand." Another contact suggested that height-
ened trade tensions with China have dampened domes-
tic freight demand. Several freight haulers said that 
shipments will increase ahead of the upcoming holiday 
season, although some expected fourth-quarter levels to 
be lower than in the prior year. ■ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy grew at a modest rate since our previous report. Manufacturers experienced a decline in 
shipments and new orders, and continued to cite trade-related impacts on demand and raw materials costs. Trucking 
companies also reported a modest decline in shipping volumes. Ports, on the other hand, saw robust activity stemming 
from strong import volumes. Agriculture contacts gave mixed reports, largely due to differing weather conditions across 
the region. Meanwhile, demand for nonfinancial services remained moderate. Several firms indicated that they were 
holding back on new investment due to uncertainties with trade, the federal budget, and the availability of labor. Tourism 
increased moderately. Auto sales were reportedly up and some hardware stores saw strong growth while other retailers 
experienced slower sales and less buyer traffic. Residential real estate sales and new home construction increased 
modestly, on balance. Commercial real estate contacts reported some increased leasing activity, low vacancy rates, and 
stable to modestly increasing rental rates. Bankers generally indicated modestly increasing deposits and loan demand. 
Labor markets remained tight and wage increases were modest. Prices continued to rise at a moderate rate.    
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor remained strong in recent weeks. 
Staffing agents reported a high level of job postings; 
however, finding qualified applicants continued to be 
difficult across job categories and experience levels. One 
staffing agency said that they had turned down some 
clients because they believed the wages that were of-
fered would not be high enough to attract quality work-
ers. Looking ahead to the fall recruiting season, staffing 
firms expect demand to increase across the board and 
expect the usual seasonal uptick for temporary workers. 
Wage increases remained modest.       
Prices  
Price growth remained moderate for most finished goods 
and services since our previous report. Manufacturers 
generally indicated moderate growth in prices paid, 
which narrowly outpaced growth in selling prices. Sever-
al firms continued to note that tariffs were a driving factor 
behind some higher raw material prices, but lower prices 
were reported for lumber, steel, copper, and trucking. In 
addition, some retaliatory tariffs by China reportedly 
drove down selling prices for U.S. scrap metal and pa-
per. Service sector firms also reported moderate price 
growth in both prices paid and prices received.    
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers in the Fifth District experienced sluggish 
demand since our last report. Both shipments and new 
orders declined, and many firms reported weaker local 
business conditions. Several contacts cited tariff-related 
effects on their businesses, including lower demand and 
higher raw materials costs that they could not pass 
through to customers. A Virginia manufacturer delayed 
purchasing new equipment because of fear that busi-
ness conditions would deteriorate in the coming months. 
However, a South Carolina appliance manufacturer 
reported strong sales and revenue growth and invested 
in expansion projects.      
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports saw strong growth in recent weeks 
that met or exceeded expectations. Growth of imports 
was particularly robust, as import volumes remained 
above export volumes. One port continued on a strong 
capital investment plan because of good conditions, but 
another delayed investments in order to see how busi-
ness would change in the coming months. A Fifth District 
airport saw a slowdown in international cargo traffic. 
Executives also expressed concerns about future trade 
conditions and impending fuel price increases. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
On balance, Fifth District trucking companies reported a 
modest decline in shipping volumes in recent weeks. 
Several firms attributed the drop in volumes to tariff-
related reductions of shipments and they expressed 
concerns that these reductions would continue in com-
ing months. One contact stated that the softer demand 
put downward pressure on shipping prices. Another said 
that they reduced staff and capital expenditures as a 
result. In contrast, a Virginia firm reported an uptick in 
volumes across a wide range of products and custom-
ers.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Tourism in the Fifth District was moderate in recent 
weeks. Hotels in Greenville and Charleston, South 
Carolina, saw strong demand. In addition, an executive 
at a Virginia resort reported strong demand but never-
theless had to close some pools due to a labor short-
age, which was expected to be persistent. Conversely, 
tourism in Asheville, North Carolina, and in Baltimore 
was reportedly down, and an amusement park in North 
Carolina attributed soft business to rainy weather.  
Fifth District retailers reported mixed business conditions 
since our last report. A Virginia auto dealer reported 
growth in sales of both new and used cars. A high end 
clothing store, however, reduced inventory after several 
weak months. Also, a shoe store reported a drop in both 
sales and customer traffic. Hardware stores around the 
District gave conflicting reports on demand, with some 
seeing strong growth and others seeing a drop in busi-
ness. Several retailers reported increased costs result-
ing from tariffs, which they were partially able to pass on 
to consumers.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased modestly, over-
all. Brokers reported steady levels of buyer traffic in 
recent weeks. Existing home sales remained below year
-ago levels, in part due to low inventory levels. Mean-
while, agents reported steady rental demand for single-
family homes. Home prices rose modestly, on balance, 
while days on the market were generally unchanged at 
low levels. New home construction and sales increased 
modestly while speculative construction remained low 
and was mostly for higher priced homes.  
Commercial real estate brokers reported a moderate 
rise in industrial leasing across the District. Office leas-
ing was mostly unchanged in recent weeks, with the 
exceptions of Charlotte, NC, and Washington, D.C., 
which experienced strong activity. Retail leasing was 
reported to be flat to down slightly. Vacancy rates re-
mained low in most markets and rental rates were stable 
to increasing modestly in all sub-markets. On the com-
mercial sales side, brokers reported modest increases in 
prices and sales. Industrial construction increased mod-
estly across the District, while multifamily construction 
and leasing remained steady.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan demand rose modestly in recent weeks. 
Residential mortgage demand was generally described 
as stable to increasing modestly. Additionally, a few 
lenders noted an increase in residential refinance loans. 
On the commercial side, real estate loan demand 
strengthened modestly. Business loan demand improved 
slightly and automotive lending was reportedly flat com-
pared to the previous report. Deposits grew modestly 
and credit quality remained stable at strong levels.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Since our previous Beige Book report, demand for nonfi-
nancial services remained moderate, overall. Profession-
al and health services firms generally reported steady to 
increasing demand. A few contacts, however, reported 
that turnover and labor shortages were driving up recruit-
ing costs and in some cases constraining growth. Educa-
tional institutions also indicated steady demand, and a 
university president saw significant investment in com-
puter science related programs in Northern Virginia. On 
balance, services firms indicated modest business in-
vestment. A few firms said they were holding back or 
being cautious due to uncertainties around trade, the 
federal budget, and the availability of labor.  
Agriculture 
Weather effects varied across the district. For example, 
a farmer in Maryland saw improvement this year due to 
more favorable weather conditions and remarked that 
other farmers in their area, except for dairy, seemed to 
being doing well. In contrast, a farmer in South Carolina 
said that the heat and lack of rain were hurting crops. In 
general, trade issues and low commodity prices were 
hurting farmers, including by lessening their ability to 
repay loans and by reducing their desire to purchase 
new equipment.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity softened slightly during the reporting period. Many firms 
noted persistent challenges with filling positions. Annual wage increases remained between 3-4 percent, on average, 
and businesses across the District continued to report increased nonlabor input costs. Tourism activity during the sum-
mer season was mixed. Retail sales levels remained steady since the last report, and vehicle sales increased. Residen-
tial real estate sales and construction remained below year-ago levels, and home prices appreciated modestly. Com-
mercial real estate contacts reported that leasing and sales activity remained steady throughout the District. Manufactur-
ers noted a decrease in overall business activity since the previous report. Conditions at financial institutions were sta-
ble, although consumer loan growth continued to decline.  
Employment and Wages  
Reports of challenges finding, hiring, and retaining work-
ers persisted for various labor market segments. Several 
business contacts continued to share that their inability 
to secure labor was holding back growth, encouraging 
investments in automation, and pushing a few firms to 
acquire competitors as a means of gaining labor re-
sources. Employers continued to collaborate with work-
force development organizations and schools to en-
hance curricula at vocational centers and to create pipe-
lines of potential employees. A number of contacts ex-
pressed that hiring and retention costs, primarily those 
associated with training programs, were rising. Employ-
ers continued to report that while they had increased 
wages to attract and retain workers, efforts to improve 
employee benefits offerings, enhance work arrangement 
flexibility, eliminate some drug testing, and reduce expe-
rience requirements remained prominent attraction and 
retention tools. 
Annual wage increases, on average, remained between 
3-4 percent, though several employers noted that, in 
some cases, overall compensation was accelerating at a 
fast clip as healthcare costs were rising. Wage growth 
was concentrated in technology, healthcare, construc-
tion, and lower-skilled hourly positions. Business con-
tacts continued to report that demographic shifts from 
older experienced workers to younger inexperienced 
workers were compressing salary budgets. 
Prices  
Businesses across the District continued to report mod-
est increases in nonlabor input costs. Firms affected by 
tariffs were typically successful in passing along increas-
es and noted some success in holding on to margins. 
The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey 
showed year-over-year unit costs were up 1.9 percent in 
August. Survey respondents indicated they expect unit 
costs to rise 2.0 percent over the next twelve months. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
While retail sales levels remained steady since the last 
report, District retailers noted heightened uncertainty 
among consumers due to the geo-political environment; 
they also expressed concerns about whether this uncer-
tainty will impact consumer confidence and spending 
behavior during the upcoming holiday season. New 
vehicles sales levels increased month-over-month in July 
with light trucks and SUV units driving the increase; 
sales of used vehicles also rose.  
District tourism activity was mixed, and hospitality con-
tacts reported an uptick in uncertainty since the last 
report. On balance, the summer season was softer than 
expected with a year-over-year decline in hotel occupan-
cy and average daily rates in Louisiana and Florida. 
Contacts in Alabama and Georgia reported strong lei-
sure travel and business conference bookings. 
 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
Although a healthy labor market and declining mortgage 
rates sustained housing demand throughout the District, 
sales remained below year-ago levels in several mar-
kets. Supply constraints, particularly in more affordable 
price segments, remained a primary impediment to 
stronger sales. Additionally, new home construction 
remained down from year-ago levels. Although very few 
markets experienced a decline in home values, the rate 
of home price appreciation continued to moderate in 
most markets as the pace of home sales slowed. Moder-
ate price pressure coupled with declining mortgage rates 
helped increase housing affordability. 
District commercial real estate contacts reported leasing 
and sales activity remained stable since the previous 
report. Overall, rents continued to grow and vacancy 
trended downward at a modest pace. However, some 
contacts noted slowing rent growth and greater conces-
sions in the multifamily, retail, and office segments. 
Despite increasing costs, contacts reported strong con-
struction activity. Robust multifamily construction contin-
ued to dominate specific metro submarkets leading to 
increased concerns of possible oversupply in a few 
areas. Industry participants noted continuing strength in 
the industrial sector. Contacts reported that capital for 
most projects was readily available via banks and non-
bank entities.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported a decrease in overall business 
activity since the previous reporting period. A number of 
firms indicated that new orders and production levels 
declined, while finished inventory levels continued to 
rise. Purchasing managers cited that supply delivery 
times were slightly longer than normal and a few con-
tacts indicated that tariffs were impacting business activi-
ty. Expectations for future production levels decreased, 
with just over one quarter of contacts expecting higher 
production levels over the next six months. 
Transportation 
District transportation contacts indicated that activity was 
generally consistent with the previous report. Ports expe-
rienced increases in container traffic and bulk and break 
bulk cargos. Logistics contacts reported continued 
growth in e-commerce shipments. Trucking contacts, 
however, reported weaker year-over-year freight vol-
umes, attributed to slowing demand and excess capaci-
ty. Railroad contacts noted further declines in intermodal 
shipments and total rail traffic compared with year earlier 
levels. Air cargo contacts reported a continued decelera-
tion in international cargo volume caused by slowing 
global economic conditions and trade policy uncertainty. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions were stable. Total loan 
growth was steady although consumer loan growth 
continued to decline. Competition for deposits continued 
to put pressure on net interest margins along with lower 
loan yields. Nonperforming assets remained near historic 
lows. 
Energy  
Investment in pipeline infrastructure to transport liquefied 
natural gas (LNG) and crude oil to Gulf Coast refiners 
remained elevated, as firms endeavored to alleviate 
product bottlenecks. Companies continued to pursue 
development of LNG and crude export facilities along the 
Atlantic and Gulf Coasts. In anticipation of Hurricane 
Barry, offshore producers evacuated hundreds of drilling 
platforms in the Gulf of Mexico, causing oil and gas 
production to fall temporarily. A number of contacts 
reaffirmed that while construction on industrial megapro-
jects, largely chemicals manufacturing and oil and gas 
refining expansion, slowed in 2019, planned investment 
along the Gulf Coast picked up during this reporting 
period. Utilities contacts confirmed the acceleration in 
industrial activity, observed via natural gas and petro-
chemical utilities segments. Utilities contacts also shared 
that activity in renewables increased in recent months, 
particularly solar energy facility installations across Flori-
da, with many projected to be up and running in the 2020 
to 2021 timeframe. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions across the District were mixed. 
Recent reports indicated much of the District was 
drought-free although parts of Alabama, Georgia, the 
Florida panhandle, and Tennessee experienced abnor-
mally dry to moderate drought conditions. Some produc-
ers in Louisiana reported crop damage due to Hurricane 
Barry. Average farm real estate values in the District 
rose year-over-year with the exception of Georgia, where 
values declined. On a year-over-year basis, prices paid 
to farmers in June were up for corn and beef but down 
for cotton, rice, soybeans, broilers, and eggs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased slightly overall in July and early August, and contacts expected 
growth to continue at a similar pace over the next 12 months. Consumer spending increased modestly; employment and 
business spending increased slightly; and manufacturing and construction and real estate were little changed. Wages 
and prices rose slightly. Financial conditions were little changed on balance. Farm income prospects improved some, 
but remained poor for most agriculture sectors. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased slightly over the reporting period 
and contacts expected a similar-sized increase over the 
next 12 months. Hiring continued to be focused on pro-
fessional and technical, sales, and production workers, 
with a noticeable increase in the number of contacts 
hiring professional and technical workers. As they have 
for some time, contacts indicated that the labor market 
was tight and that it was difficult to fill positions at all skill 
levels. A staffing firm reported little change in billable 
hours. Wages increased slightly overall. Contacts were 
most likely to report wage increases for professional and 
technical, administrative, and production workers. Many 
firms reported rising benefits costs. 
Prices 
Prices rose slightly in July and early August, though 
contacts expected prices to rise a bit faster over the next 
12 months. Retail prices increased slightly. One contact 
said that the effect on retail prices of the scheduled new 
tariffs on Chinese imports wouldn’t be felt until early 
2020. In contrast, another contact reported that some 
retailers had already started implementing incremental 
price increases to avoid a single, noticeable increase 
when the tariffs came into effect. Producer prices rose 
slightly, with contacts reporting falling freight costs and 
slower increases in labor and materials costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased at a modest pace over 
the reporting period. Nonauto retail sales were up mod-
estly, with gains in the apparel and general merchandise 
sectors but declines in the furniture and building materi-
als sectors. Contacts noted that malls and department 
stores continued to struggle. Back-to-school sales were 
meeting expectations, with reports of particularly good 
results for discount stores and big box supercenters. 
Sales of new and used light vehicles increased modest-
ly. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in July and early 
August. Retail inventories were generally at comfortable 
levels. One contact reported that a few apparel and big 
box retailers had ordered aggressively for the holiday 
shopping season but that most retailers were placing 
orders that were more conservative. Manufacturing 
inventories were somewhat elevated overall. Capital 
spending moved up slightly, and contacts expected that 
pace to continue over the next 12 months. Outlays were 
primarily for replacing industrial and IT equipment. There 
was a noticeable decline in the number of contacts re-
porting spending for renovating structures. Contacts 
continued to note that elevated uncertainty about the 
future state of the economy and international trade policy 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
was holding back investment and spurring efforts to 
diversify supply chains. Demand for transportation ser-
vices declined moderately. Commercial and industrial 
energy demand increased slightly, led by increases in 
manufacturing utilization. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was little changed 
over the reporting period. Residential construction was 
flat, with increases in the multifamily sector offset by 
decreases in luxury single-family building. Residential 
real estate activity decreased modestly as tight invento-
ries for starter homes continued to hold back sales. 
Contacts continued to report that it was unprofitable to 
build starter homes because of high costs. Contacts 
indicated that the effect of lower mortgage rates on 
home buying was weaker than usual. Nonresidential 
construction increased slightly, and one contact reported 
that bidding activity remained high. Like residential build-
ers, nonresidential builders also noted that high costs 
were slowing the rate of construction. Commercial real 
estate activity was unchanged, with steady activity 
across most sectors. Rents ticked up, while vacancies 
and the availability of sublease space were flat.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production was little changed in July and 
early August, though contacts were generally satisfied 
with the level of activity. Steel demand increased slightly. 
Demand for heavy machinery declined some, though 
one contact expected orders to increase during the 
second half of the year, particularly from the mining 
industry. Specialty metals manufacturers reported a 
slight decline in orders, as decreased demand from the 
auto and heavy equipment industries was only partially 
offset by increased demand from the defense and aero-
space industries. Orders for heavy trucks increased, 
though contacts expected demand to slow through the 
second half of the year. Manufacturers of construction 
materials reported a modest increase in shipments. Auto 
production was flat. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Financial market participants at-
tributed lower equity and higher bond prices to greater 
uncertainty about the future state of the economy. Busi-
ness loan demand rose modestly, with reports of in-
creased equipment purchases and M&A activity but 
lower commercial real estate activity. Loan quality re-
mained solid across most sectors. Contacts said that 
lending standards were little changed, but noted that 
strong competition was creating pressure to loosen 
them. Consumer loan demand increased slightly, with 
little change in loan quality or standards. There were 
reports of a small increase in mortgage refinancing due 
to lower interest rates. 
Agriculture 
Farm income prospects improved some, but remained 
poor for most agriculture sectors. Expectations for corn 
and soybean output improved some but were still much 
lower compared to a year ago, and the condition of crops 
was highly variable. Crop development was as much as 
a month behind normal because the wet spring delayed 
planting. Prices for corn and soybeans declined. Egg 
and dairy prices moved higher, while hog and cattle 
prices moved lower. Contacts noted that another round 
of payments from the Market Facilitation Program, along 
with other government programs, were helping to make 
up for low farm incomes. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have been mixed but generally unchanged since our previous report. Labor market conditions 
remained tight as firms continued to note difficulties finding qualified workers. While nonlabor input costs increased 
moderately, contacts reported only a slight uptick in prices charged to consumers. Construction activity improved slight-
ly; however, some developers reported delaying projects due to economic uncertainty. In transportation, barge activity 
continued to improve, while airport cargo traffic declined. Farming conditions remained strained. Across all industries, 
the outlook among contacts turned slightly pessimistic. On net, a slightly greater share of contacts expect conditions 
during the remainder of 2019 to be worse or somewhat worse than the same period in 2018.    
Employment and Wages  
Employment has grown slightly since our previous re-
port. On net, 12 percent of survey respondents reported 
that employment was higher than a year ago. Labor 
market tightness has persisted throughout the District, 
including in transportation, healthcare, and manufactur-
ing. Firms reported increasing benefits, loosening hiring 
requirements, and more aggressively marketing them-
selves to attract workers. 
Wages have grown moderately since our previous re-
port. On net, 40 percent of contacts reported that wages 
were higher than a year ago; one contact in Little Rock 
reported that new graduates applying to jobs at an engi-
neering firm were expecting $10,000 to $15,000 more 
than their offered starting salary. Numerous firms saw 
rising wages as a consequence of the tight labor market, 
with several businesses—due to their size, location, or 
budget—especially struggling to keep up with wage 
gains and attract potential employees.   
Prices  
Prices have increased slightly since our previous report. 
On net, 13 percent of contacts reported that prices 
charged to consumers increased in the current quarter 
relative to the same time last year. This is the fourth 
consecutive quarter in which the share reporting higher 
selling prices has declined. Despite the reported soft-
ness in prices charged to consumers, input costs contin-
ue to increase at a moderate rate. On net, 32 percent of 
contacts reported higher nonlabor costs. 
Business contacts continued to note the effects of tariffs 
and the current trade negotiations with China on price 
pressures, although the magnitude and direction of these 
effects vary greatly by product. Agricultural commodity 
prices generally remained depressed relative to the 
same time last year and have fallen since our previous 
report. On the other hand, several contacts noted moder-
ate increases in the prices of steel, construction materi-
als, and automobiles.   
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers and auto dealers indicate 
consumer activity has been mixed since our previous 
report. July real sales tax collections increased in Mis-
souri, Tennessee, and Kentucky, but decreased in Ar-
kansas relative to a year ago. Most general retailers and 
auto dealers reported that sales have increased since 
the same time last year, in line with expectations. How-
ever, District auto dealers noted seeing customers pur-
chase more used and low-end vehicles, and their outlook 
for the rest of 2019 has turned pessimistic. Many cited 
concerns about higher new vehicle prices, elevated 
interest rates, and trade uncertainty.   
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has been mixed since our previ-
ous report. A majority of contacts reported declines in 
production, new orders, and capacity utilization relative 
to one year ago. Respondents have noted slowdowns in 
the growth of manufacturing activity over the past few 
quarterly surveys, but this is the first time that they have 
reported declines for all three of these measures since 
2016. Multiple contacts reported that tariffs and general 
uncertainty with regard to the ongoing trade negotiations 
with China contributed to declines in activity. On net, 
most contacts expect manufacturing conditions to stay at 
a similar level next quarter. However, several local man-
ufacturing firms across a variety of industries, including 
automotive and food manufacturing, recently announced 
plans to expand operations. Likewise, other survey-
based indexes indicate that activity in Arkansas and 
Missouri increased at a modest pace from one month 
earlier, with new orders and production increasing in 
both states.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the services sector has been mixed since our 
previous report. The number of posted vacancies for 
nonfinancial services occupations increased from June 
to July in St. Louis but decreased in Louisville and Mem-
phis. Transportation activity was mixed. Cargo traffic at 
District airports decreased slightly year over year, which 
some contacts attributed to a general slowdown in global 
trade. However, passenger traffic remained above year-
ago levels. Barge traffic continued to improve from the 
holdup of business caused by the severe flooding in the 
spring, and contacts expect a rebound of activity through 
the rest of the year.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has been stable since our 
previous report. Seasonally adjusted home sales in-
creased modestly across the four largest MSAs in the 
District. Conversely, a slight majority of contacts reported 
weaker demand for single-family homes relative to a 
year ago, and nearly 40 percent noted that third-quarter 
sales have fallen short of expectations. Contacts contin-
ued to report inventory shortages, particularly for lower-
end homes.  
Residential construction activity increased slightly. There 
was a slight increase in June permit activity across the 
four largest MSAs in the District. On net, 14 percent of 
respondents reported higher construction activity relative 
to the same time last year, and 7 percent expect contin-
ued growth in the next quarter.  
 
Commercial real estate activity has improved slightly 
since our previous report. Survey respondents reported 
a slight increase in year-over-year demand for office and 
industrial space and a modest decrease in demand for 
retail space. Demand for multifamily properties was 
unchanged.  
Commercial construction activity improved slightly. Sur-
vey respondents reported healthy demand for construc-
tion of industrial property types and stated that several 
projects are lined up for the next few months. However, 
there are some reports of developers deferring future 
projects due to recent economic uncertainty. Local con-
tacts continued to report labor shortages.       
Banking and Finance 
Overall loan demand in the District has weakened slight-
ly since our previous report. Demand for mortgages 
slightly increased relative to one year ago, while demand 
for auto loans and commercial and industrial loans fell 
modestly. Bankers expect little to no change to overall 
loan demand in the fourth quarter. Credit standards 
tightened slightly compared with year-ago levels. Delin-
quencies fell slightly on a year-over-year basis and are 
expected to continue declining into the fourth quarter.   
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions were down modestly from 
the previous reporting period. Compared with mid-July, 
the percentages of cotton and rice rated fair or better 
declined modestly, while those for corn and soybeans 
declined slightly. Relative to the previous year, the per-
centage of all four crops rated fair or better declined 
moderately. District contacts indicated that farming con-
ditions remained strained due to low commodity prices 
and lingering effects from the unusually wet weather and 
flooding in the spring. New government assistance to 
farmers is expected to provide some short-term allevia-
tion. 
Natural resource extraction conditions rose slightly from 
June to July, with seasonally adjusted coal production 
increasing 1.8 percent. Additionally, July production was 
0.8 percent above that of a year ago. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity was stable since the previous report. Employment was flat, while wage pressures were 
moderate and price pressures remained modest overall. The District economy saw growth in construction, real estate, 
and manufacturing. Consumer spending was flat while tourism activity was mixed. Energy activity decreased while 
agricultural conditions remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment was flat since the last report, with some 
continuing signs of softness. Hiring demand remained 
healthy, according to recent ad hoc polls of employers in 
Minnesota and Montana. A Montana insurance contact 
said that renewals for workers’ compensation policies 
showed that firms widely expected higher employment 
levels over the coming year. July job postings were 7 
and 5 percent higher, respectively, in North and South 
Dakota compared with a year earlier. Job postings rose 
slightly in Montana, but fell slightly for Minnesota and 
Michigan’s Upper Peninsula. Labor availability continued 
to constrain hiring, and turnover remained problematic 
for many firms. A northern Wisconsin contact said, “It’s 
hard to find a business that is not looking for more 
employees,” and a few employers said they will have to 
close or move if workers cannot be found. There were 
some notable signs of softness, however. July 
employment fell slightly in most District states (and 
overall) compared with June levels. Initial unemployment 
insurance claims saw a 10 percent uptick over the most 
recent six-week period (ending in early August) 
compared with a year earlier; continuing claims also rose 
slightly. Staffing contacts reported that recent job orders 
were mixed, with declines seen in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin offices. But most staffing contacts predicted 
strong third-quarter orders in part because businesses 
would soon be losing many student workers once school 
began. 
Wage pressures varied, but were moderate overall. Two-
thirds of large Minnesota employers responding to an ad 
hoc poll said that wages grew by less than 3 percent 
over the last 12 months, and wage expectations for the 
coming 12 months were even more modest. However, in 
Montana, a slight majority of poll respondents said 
wages grew by more than 3 percent, including nearly 
one in five that saw increases of more than 5 percent. 
But expectations for future wage increases were slightly 
lower. Staffing contacts cited a wide range of wage 
increases for available jobs; a Minnesota contact noted 
that average wages for jobs across more than a dozen 
offices in the District rose by less than 2 percent over the 
last 12 months. However, two other staffing contacts 
reported wage increases of 8 percent or more.   
Prices 
Price pressures remained modest overall since the 
previous reporting period. A majority of respondents to a 
survey of Montana businesses reported having 
increased prices charged to customers by less than 2 
percent over the past year, and a larger proportion 
expected to increase prices in the same range over the 
coming year. Input price pressures were slightly greater, 
according to respondents. Contacts in the construction 
sector continued to report brisk input price increases. 
Retail fuel prices in District states as of mid-August were 
modestly lower relative to the previous reporting period. 
Prices received by farmers in June increased from a 
year earlier for corn, hay, cattle, hogs, milk, and turkeys, 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019

I-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis  
while prices for wheat, soybeans, eggs, and chickens 
decreased.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was flat overall since the last report. 
Gross sales in South Dakota and Wisconsin in July were 
flat year-over-year; in Wisconsin, that represented a 
modest rebound from slower June sales. Sales tax 
collections in North Dakota in July rose by about 15 
percent compared with a year earlier. Vehicle sales in 
the western part of the District were higher in July, and a 
dealer contact said he expected August and September 
sales to be good. But recreational and powersport 
vehicle sales across the District have been lower, 
according to industry sources.  
Tourism offered a mixed bag. Hotel occupancy in July 
saw a moderate bump over last year in Minnesota and 
Montana. A Montana lodging contact said it has been a 
“normal” tourism season overall, but added that “for the 
first time in a while, we needed to discount room rates to 
fill rooms.” A Minnesota resort contact said bookings 
were about 2 percent higher this season compared with 
last year, and guest spending was higher. However, 
visitation to six of the eight largest national parks in the 
District was down in July and year-to-date, with several 
seeing double-digit declines. Attendance at state fairs 
was higher this year in Montana but lower in North 
Dakota. Traffic to the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally in 
South Dakota was down modestly compared with last 
year. Contacts also noted that labor constraints have 
meant shorter operating hours for some businesses.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction grew strongly since the last 
report. The value of construction starts across the 
District saw a healthy rise in July compared with a year 
earlier, continuing an uptick seen in June. A construction 
project database indicated that the number of new and 
active projects in the District through early August was 
slightly higher than or on par with last year. A contact in 
northern Wisconsin noted strong activity in the Duluth-
Superior region, particularly in healthcare and energy. A 
Minnesota banker expected “continued strong demand” 
for new hotel and multi-family construction lending. 
Another contact in the state said, “All I hear is that 
(construction companies) are incredibly busy. There’s so 
much work out there.” Contacts said some of the 
increase in activity was due to persistent spring rains 
and flooding, which pushed more work into summer 
months. Minneapolis-St. Paul saw a healthy increase in 
single-family permits in July compared with a year 
earlier, but other large District cities saw mixed 
permitting activity. 
Commercial real estate grew modestly. In Minneapolis-
St. Paul, industrial property continued to see healthy 
demand, falling vacancy rates, and strong new 
development. Office vacancy rates rose overall, but 
asking rents have risen in some submarkets due to 
strong demand from the tech sector. Retail vacancies 
were stable overall despite continued pressure on 
traditional retailers. However, average lease rates and 
property sales were lower, and new construction hit a 
multi-year low. In Sioux Falls, S.D., office and retail 
vacancy rates have risen, while the industrial vacancy 
rate was stable at very low levels. Residential real estate 
grew moderately. Closed home sales for July grew in 
most markets compared with a year earlier, helped by 
lower mortgage rates. Great Falls, Mont., and Grand 
Forks, N.D., saw particularly strong July sales, while 
statewide sales in Minnesota rose 4 percent.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity grew slightly, with some 
signs of softening. An index of manufacturing conditions 
indicated increased activity in July compared with a 
month earlier in Minnesota and the Dakotas. A medical-
device producer announced a large expansion at a 
Minnesota facility. Two pet food manufacturers 
announced new plants in Minnesota. Several industry 
contacts reported a tight supply of workers as the main 
constraint on growth. However, other contacts noted 
some signs of softening, particularly in international 
demand. A producer of capital equipment noted slowing 
in the pace of new orders and a decline in order backlog.   
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak. Recent 
estimates lowered the planted acreage and expected 
production for corn, soybean, and spring wheat in District 
states compared with last year, due in part to heavy 
rains and flooding. Respondents to the Minneapolis 
Fed’s second-quarter (July) survey of agricultural credit 
conditions indicated that farm income and capital 
spending decreased relative to a year earlier, with further 
declines expected for the coming three months. 
However, some contacts expressed optimism about a 
recent rally in commodity prices. District oil and gas 
exploration activity as of mid-August was down relative 
to the previous report. District iron ore mines continued 
to operate at near-capacity; a Minnesota facility finished 
a $100 million equipment upgrade that would allow it to 
produce higher-grade ore. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity edged up in July and early August, led by increases in consumer spending, wholesale 
trade and professional and high-tech services. Consumer spending rose modestly, including gains in retail, auto, restau-
rant and tourism sales. Manufacturing activity fell slightly, and a majority of contacts expected their businesses to be 
negatively affected by the latest round of U.S. tariffs on China. District real estate activity rose, but the pace of growth in 
the residential real estate and construction sectors softened. Energy activity held steady, but expectations for future 
activity eased. District agricultural conditions remained weak, and commodity prices fell with higher-than-anticipated 
production estimates and ongoing trade disputes. Loan demand increased modestly and loan quality improved, while 
deposits fell slightly. Employment rose, but contacts in several sectors noted a slowdown in job gains as labor shortages 
persisted. Wages were mixed across sectors, and a majority of respondents expected the pace of wage growth to re-
main the same or accelerate in 2020. Input prices rose slightly, while selling prices continued to hold steady.       
 
Employment and Wages  
District employment rose, and employee hours held 
steady since the previous survey period. Compared to a 
year ago, contacts reported that employment gains were 
strongest in the real estate, health services and retail 
trade sectors. However, the pace of job gains had 
slowed in several sectors including manufacturing, ener-
gy, transportation, tourism and auto sales in recent 
months. Looking ahead, contacts expected employment 
to increase slightly and employee hours to remain flat in 
the next few months.  
A majority of contacts continued to report labor shortag-
es across all skill levels. Specifically, contacts noted 
shortages for hourly retail and food-services positions, 
truck drivers, auto technicians, physicians, pilots and IT 
personnel. Wages were mixed across industries as 
services sector wages increased modestly since the 
previous survey period, while manufacturing wages held 
steady. A majority of respondents expected wage gains 
in 2020 to equal or exceed those in 2019.           
Prices  
Input prices rose slightly in July and early August, while 
selling prices continued to hold steady. However, both 
input and selling prices were moderately higher than a 
year ago, and contacts expected modest gains moving 
forward. In the retail sector, selling and input prices rose 
modestly, and moderate increases were anticipated in 
the months ahead. Respondents in the restaurant sector 
noted modestly higher input prices and flat selling prices, 
with both prices strongly above year-ago levels. Manu-
facturing and transportation contacts reported steady 
input prices and selling prices since the previous survey 
period and expected modest growth in the months 
ahead. Unlike other sectors who all reported higher 
prices than a year ago, selling prices in the construction 
supply sector were modestly lower than both the previ-
ous survey period and year-ago levels.           
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly compared to 
the previous survey period and year-ago levels, and 
contacts expected slight gains in the coming autumn 
months. Retail sales continued to rise moderately in July 
and early August, and contacts anticipated sales to 
increase modestly moving forward. Auto sales improved, 
rising slightly higher than the previous survey period 
after declining earlier this summer. Auto contacts also 
expected moderately stronger sales in the months 
ahead. Trucks and SUVs sold well, while sedans sold 
poorly. Restaurant and tourism sales grew modestly 
compared to the previous survey period and were above 
year-ago levels. However, both sectors anticipated mod-
est declines in the coming months.      
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity declined slightly in July and early 
August, but activity remained slightly above year-ago 
levels. Factory production and shipments edged down 
compared to the previous survey period at both durable 
and non-durable goods plants, while new orders de-
clined slightly. Manufacturers anticipated modest in-
creases in production, shipments and new orders in the 
coming months. Capital spending was modestly above 
year-ago levels, and slight increases were expected in 
the months ahead. However, a majority of respondents 
expected the most recent round of U.S. tariffs on Chi-
nese goods to negatively affect their businesses. 
Outside of manufacturing, other business contacts re-
ported mixed sales since the previous survey period. 
Firms in the transportation sector experienced modestly 
lower sales, while sales increased strongly in the whole-
sale trade sector and slightly in the professional and high
-tech services sector. In the coming months, contacts in 
the professional, high-tech and wholesale trade sectors 
expected sales to expand moderately and transportation 
sector contacts anticipated modest increases.            
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity continued to expand, but at a 
slower pace than the last survey period as growth in the 
residential real estate sector moderated. Residential 
home sales and inventories rose, but sales were below 
year-ago levels. Inventories were expected to continue 
to increase slightly, while sales were expected to de-
crease in the months ahead. Residential real estate 
contacts noted that sales of low- and medium-priced 
homes continued to outpace sales of higher-priced 
homes. Home prices continued to fall modestly since the 
previous survey period, but remained higher than a year 
ago. Residential construction activity edged down and 
was similar to year-ago levels. Commercial real estate 
activity continued to expand at a modest pace as ab-
sorption, completions, construction underway, sales and 
prices rose, while vacancy rates fell. Respondents in the 
commercial real estate sector projected similar growth in 
the months ahead.        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banking 
Bankers reported a modest increase in overall loan 
demand, with somewhat mixed reports across catego-
ries. Respondents indicated a strong increase in the 
demand for residential real estate loans and a modest 
increase in demand for consumer installment loans. 
Demand for commercial real estate loans held steady, 
while demand for commercial and industrial loans and 
agricultural loans declined. Bankers indicated a modest 
improvement in loan quality compared to a year ago and 
expected a slight improvement in loan quality over the 
next six months. Credit standards remained largely 
unchanged in all major loan categories, and deposit 
levels decreased slightly.          
Energy 
Overall District energy activity held steady compared 
with the previous survey period, but expectations for 
future activity continued to ease somewhat. The number 
of active oil and gas rigs continued to edge down, pri-
marily driven by a drop in Oklahoma rigs, while drilling in 
Colorado and Wyoming moved higher since the last 
survey period. District oil production levels continued to 
expand in recent months and remained above levels 
from a year ago. Natural gas production also remained 
at high levels. Oil prices inched down while natural gas 
prices continued to decline. Regional firms expected less 
drilling and business activity in the next six months.            
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy remained weak, and 
commodity prices declined in response to supply expec-
tations and trade uncertainty. Regional contacts reported 
weak farm income in the most recent survey period, but 
expected slower deterioration in the coming months. 
Less pessimistic expectations in the second quarter 
were supported by increases in crop prices earlier in the 
year. However, sharp declines in crop and livestock 
prices in August weighed on farm revenues. Hog and 
soybean prices declined moderately alongside ongoing 
trade disputes, and cattle prices decreased sharply 
following a substantial disruption at a major beef pro-
cessing facility located in the District. Corn and wheat 
prices also declined sharply following higher-than-
anticipated production estimates.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Moderate expansion continued in the Eleventh District economy. Output growth in manufacturing strengthened, and 
expansion in the service sector was strong in July but eased in August. Home sales rose, and loan volumes expanded 
albeit at a slower pace. Retail sales were flat and drilling activity continued to decline. Agricultural conditions deteriorat-
ed due to hot and dry weather. Employment growth was solid and wage pressures remained elevated. Selling prices 
rose modestly, as firms’ ability to pass through cost increases remained limited. Outlooks improved slightly in manufac-
turing but softened in the service, energy, and agricultural sectors, with uncertainty surrounding trade policy, tariffs, 
stock market volatility, and slowing global growth weighing on business sentiment. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment expanded at a solid pace. A lack of quali-
fied candidates continued to challenge businesses 
across sectors and skill levels, but shortages remained 
most severe for mid-skilled positions. Construction craft 
labor shortages were reportedly less acute, though food 
services firms said they were still struggling to find work-
ers. Airlines and energy firms’ headcounts were stable, 
with hiring limited to certain skill sets. Several firms 
noted that retention of employees was a challenge as 
well.  
Wage pressures remained elevated. Many respondents 
said they were struggling to fill positions partly because 
applicants were looking for higher pay than was offered. 
Prices 
Input price pressures were moderate in the service and 
manufacturing sectors, but ticked up in retail. Selling 
prices dipped in manufacturing and increases were 
generally modest in services, as firms’ ability to pass 
through higher costs to customers remained constrained. 
About 60 percent of firms responding to supplemental 
questions in the August Texas Business Outlook Sur-
veys said they were able to pass on at least some cost 
increases, but this share was down from 76 percent in 
December. Refiners and chemical producers indicated 
that softening global demand growth and lower oil prices 
were putting downward pressure on an array of product 
prices.  
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector continued at a 
moderate pace in July, but reports of August activity 
showed a sizeable and broad-based pickup in output 
growth. Fabricated metals and construction-related 
manufacturing in particular saw notable strength among 
durables. Demand growth in nondurables was led by 
food manufacturing. Chemical production growth slowed 
in part due to softening global demand. Gulf Coast refin-
ery utilization remained healthy on a seasonally adjusted 
basis.  
Outlooks turned positive, though uncertainty remained 
elevated as trade negotiations and tariffs continued to 
affect business sentiment. 
Retail Sales 
Retailers continued to note weak activity, with sales flat 
over the reporting period. Auto demand, including used 
car sales, strengthened, but weakness prevailed in some 
seasonal segments. Outlooks remained pessimistic and 
highly uncertain, primarily driven by tariffs and trade 
tensions, though one contact noted interest rate uncer-
tainty as a factor as well. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services activity expanded strongly in July 
but growth eased in August. Expansion during the re-
porting period was led by growth in professional and 
technical services. Most staffing services companies 
continued to experience year-over-year demand increas-
es. A few that noted softness said it was in part due to 
heightened uncertainty among clients. Activity in the 
transportation and warehousing sector was mixed, alt-
hough shipments of select commodities such as steel 
and petroleum products rose strongly. Airlines cited 
healthy passenger demand, with strength in domestic 
business and leisure segments. Revenues also expand-
ed in the accommodation and food services and health 
services industries, and one contact said that increased 
wait times and security at the Texas-Mexico border had 
reduced the number of Mexican nationals visiting San 
Antonio.  
Service-sector outlooks were lackluster, with uncertainty 
surrounding trade policy, stock market volatility, slowing 
global growth, and expectations of a looming U.S. reces-
sion were a drag on expectations. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Homes sales rose during the reporting period. Existing-
home sales were generally strong in July, particularly in 
Houston, and new-home sales were characterized as 
stable to solid as well. However, a few contacts noted 
that activity was not as robust as expected given low 
mortgage rates. Lot development and single-family con-
struction was still being affected, particularly in Dallas–
Fort Worth, by earlier weather-related delays. Deal flow 
volumes were down, as builders remained cautious 
about signing on new lot agreements. A few contacts 
mentioned that the build-to-rent (single-family rental) 
market was gaining traction. Outlooks stayed optimistic 
with builders generally on plan for 2019.  
Apartment demand remained steady, supporting occu-
pancy and rent growth in most major metros. Rents were 
flat in Houston, but contacts expect them to firm up by 
year end. A contact said that high land and construction 
costs were making it difficult to pencil new deals.  
Reports on the office market indicated leasing was still 
most active for new class A space. Industrial demand 
stayed strong and generally in lockstep with the high 
volume of deliveries. Industrial construction continued to 
be elevated.  
Financial Services 
Loan volumes rose at a slower pace compared with the 
previous reporting period, with growth mixed across 
categories. Commercial and residential real estate lend-
ing expanded at a similar pace, but commercial and 
industrial loan volumes dipped and consumer loans were 
flat over the reporting period. Credit standards continued 
to tighten modestly. The cost of funds ticked up, and net 
interest margins fell further. Outlooks were less optimis-
tic, as expectations of lower loan demand, trade policy 
uncertainty, and financial market volatility weighed on 
sentiment. 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District slipped further as 
firms continued to rein in spending and orders for new 
equipment. However, the number of wells being brought 
into production increased. International demand for oil 
field services was a bright spot, with excess capacity 
being absorbed due to improved foreign offshore drilling 
and spending. Outlooks were more pessimistic as a 
result of reduced expectations for global economic 
growth.  
Agriculture 
Higher temperatures and a lack of rainfall negatively 
impacted the agriculture sector over the past six weeks, 
with drought conditions creeping back in to parts of the 
district. Dryland grain crops were largely well established 
before weather conditions deteriorated, so solid yields 
were expected. Irrigated crops planted later in the grow-
ing season were feeling more of the negative impact of 
the weather. Most agricultural commodity prices moved 
down over the reporting period, prompting some pessi-
mism among agricultural producers. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of early July 
through mid-August. The labor market remained tight, characterized by modest employment growth and moderate wage 
growth. Price inflation was largely stable. Sales of retail goods increased notably, as did activity in consumer and busi-
ness services. The manufacturing and agricultural sectors slowed somewhat. Both residential and commercial real 
estate market activity expanded moderately. Lending grew further. 
 
 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market remained tight, and employment 
growth was modest. Across the District, some contacts 
reported steady growth in employment, especially in 
urban areas. Others cited little change in employment, 
mostly due to continued difficulties in finding qualified 
workers. Information technology and financial sector 
positions were especially hard to fill. A contact in the 
payment-processing sector noted that job openings 
remained unfilled for longer than they did a year ago. 
Some employers suggested that shortages of qualified 
workers were a major factor behind a slowdown in their 
business expansion plans. A large provider of shipping 
and logistics services mentioned a restructuring-driven 
hiring freeze for managerial positions, as well as season-
al layoffs. A provider of agricultural transportation ser-
vices noted that they were only hiring replacements for 
departed workers. 
Wage growth rose further over the reporting period due 
to brisk competition for qualified workers across sectors. 
Apart from Alaska, wages for construction workers in-
creased solidly in the District due to a pickup in building 
activity. Wages in the financial services and hospitality 
sectors also continued to increase at a solid pace, alt-
hough one banker in Oregon suggested that wage in-
creases were more subdued. Hourly rates for delivery 
drivers at a major shipping and logistics business in 
California rose modestly. Businesses reported continued 
positive adjustments to starting wages due to new mini-
mum wage laws and tight competition for entry-level 
workers. Some employers noted their employees’ prefer-
ences for expanded benefits packages over higher wag-
es including signing bonuses, flexible work arrange-
ments, paid time off, and varied health insurance op-
tions.      
Prices  
Price inflation was largely stable on balance. Many busi-
nesses reported that brisk competition limited their ability 
to raise selling prices. Some input costs increased due to 
higher tariffs, though an appreciation of the dollar helped 
offset some of the higher import costs. Across the Dis-
trict, higher import costs have raised concerns over 
narrower profit margins. In some sectors such as lumber 
and natural gas, selling prices remained subdued. In 
other sectors, prices picked up somewhat. Wholesalers 
in California reported little resistance to price increases, 
and an online payment processer mentioned higher 
market prices for finished goods. In Seattle, a restaura-
teur reported upward price pressures from food and 
beverage vendors. Prices for agricultural goods re-
mained stable overall, with slightly higher prices reported 
for hay, milk, and grapes. Market prices for beef, poultry, 
and pork softened as well as those for utilities.  
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of non-auto retail goods increased notably. Con-
The Beige Book ■ August 2019 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
tacts across the District mentioned that retail conditions 
remained strong, especially in areas where population 
and income trends are favorable. In the Mountain West, 
retailers reported a brisk pickup in sales over the sum-
mer despite businesses offering lower discounts when 
compared to the previous year. In Alaska, retail sales 
were down statewide. E-commerce outlets continued to 
highlight robust sales growth both domestically and 
internationally. Demand for vehicles weakened over the 
reporting period, attributed to general unease in the 
customer base regarding the economic outlook. 
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
increased notably. Demand for shipping and logistics 
services rose rapidly, and industry projections remained 
favorable. A major service provider in the District noted 
increased investment in information technology for logis-
tics services as well as brisk growth in shipping of health
-care products. A transportation service provider noted 
high demand for train car space. Restaurants in the 
Pacific Northwest reported strong sales growth, as did 
hotel operators in the Mountain West. A contact in Ha-
waii also reported moderate growth in the hospitality 
sector but mentioned some concerns regarding future 
tourist inflows.  
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector slowed somewhat. A 
chip manufacturer in the Mountain West reported contin-
ued worldwide softening of orders. In the Pacific North-
west, wood product manufacturers noted faltering de-
mand. An energy supplier mentioned lower demand for 
natural gas from various industrial customers ranging 
from asphalt and concrete producers to paper makers. 
Production slowed in a large aerospace business in the 
Pacific Northwest. On the other hand, contacts in the 
semiconductors and metals-producing sectors reported 
strong output and a positive outlook.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity slowed somewhat in the agricultural sector. 
Inclement weather negatively affected both the timing 
and yield of harvests across different states. Intense 
storms halved cherry crops and delayed tomato and 
grain harvests. Unseasonably high temperatures de-
pressed California almond yields, though their impact 
was somewhat offset by an increase in the number of 
almond trees in production.  
Demand for agricultural products generally softened, 
both externally and domestically with notable exceptions 
in nuts and grapes markets. Trade tensions, a strong 
dollar, and a less optimistic economic outlook were 
identified as the main factors behind slower overall de-
mand. Producers of beef, poultry, and pork products 
sought alternative markets after further escalation of 
trade tensions with China. Fruit and wheat farmers in the 
Pacific Northwest noted a decline in their export busi-
ness. Lumber producers reported weakening demand for 
their products nationally. A contact in Central California 
observed stable prices but lower demand for farmland. In 
the utilities sector, electricity sales and excess capacity 
remained on par with levels earlier in the year.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Demand for residential real estate grew further. Con-
struction activity and demand for single- and multi-family 
homes remained elevated throughout the District, aided 
by low interest rates and strong employment. One nota-
ble exception was Alaska where public projects dominat-
ed. Supply continued to be somewhat constrained by 
worker shortages, though one contact in the Mountain 
West noted increased availability of skilled workers 
coming from other regions. 
On net, selling prices accelerated, and permit issuance 
picked up. Some local governments in California and 
Hawaii have started considering bans on vacation home 
ownership as a possible response to increased afforda-
bility concerns. In some areas, time-on-the-market in-
creased and prices plateaued.    
Activity in commercial real estate markets expanded 
moderately. In the Pacific Northwest and the Mountain 
West, construction activity was strong, vacancy rates 
were low, and rental rates remained elevated. Commer-
cial permitting in Washington was in line with last year’s 
numbers, and contacts highlighted that there are many 
projects in the pipeline in Oregon and California.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew further over the reporting period. 
Contacts across the District noted healthy demand for 
loans, supported by low interest rates and robust com-
mercial construction activity. Low mortgage rates 
spurred refinancing activity, though a few lenders ex-
pressed concerns over increasing downward pressures 
on net interest margins. Loan quality and capital levels 
remained solid, though a contact in California observed 
some loosening of lending standards. Competition re-
mained tight but was somewhat less brisk for loans 
relative to deposits in the current reporting period.  ■ 


