The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
April 19, 2017 
April 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
based on information collected on or before April 10, 2017. This docu-
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity increased in each of the twelve Federal Reserve Districts between mid-February and the end of 
March, with the pace of expansion equally split between modest and moderate. In addition, the pickup was evident to 
varying degrees across economic sectors. Manufacturing continued to expand at a modest to moderate pace, although 
growth in freight shipments slowed slightly. Consumer spending varied as reports of stronger light vehicle sales were 
accompanied by somewhat softer readings in non-auto retail spending. Tourism and travel activity generally picked up. 
On balance, reports suggested that residential construction growth accelerated somewhat even as growth in home 
sales slowed, in part due to a lack of inventory. Nonresidential construction remained strong, but became more mixed 
in some regions; leasing activity generally improved at a more modest pace. More than half of the reports suggested 
that loan volumes increased, while only one said they were down modestly. Non-financial services generally continued 
to expand steadily. Energy-related businesses noted improved conditions while agricultural conditions varied.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment expanded across the nation and increases ranged from modest to moderate during this period. Labor 
markets remained tight, and employers in most Districts had more difficulty filling low-skilled positions, although labor 
demand was stronger for higher skilled workers. Modest wage increases broadened, and reports noted bigger increas-
es for workers with skills that are in short supply. A larger number of firms mentioned higher turnover rates and more 
difficulty retaining workers. A couple of Districts reported that worker shortages and increased labor costs were re-
straining growth in some sectors, including manufacturing, transportation, and construction. Businesses generally 
expected labor demand to increase moderately in the next six months, and looked for modest wage growth. 
Prices 
On balance, prices rose modestly since the previous report. Input prices generally increased at a modest rate and 
outpaced gains in selling prices, which rose only slightly. Price increases were noted for some building materials, such 
as lumber and concrete, whereas metal prices remained fairly stable. Retail prices rose moderately, on the whole. 
Energy prices were flat to slightly lower. Reports on agriculture prices varied, with increases in cotton, peanuts, chick-
ens, and hogs, and declines for corn and wheat. Home prices generally moved slightly higher. Businesses mostly 
expected mild to moderate price growth to persist in the next several months.  
Boston 
Overall activity expanded and most business contacts 
reported modest to moderate increases in revenues. 
Firms continued to cite difficulty filling selected positions 
and planned small wage increases, if any. Prices were 
said to be stable or up slightly. Respondents said their 
outlook remained positive. 
 
New York 
Economic activity has expanded modestly. Labor mar-
kets remained tight and wages continued to grow mod-
erately. Input cost pressures have remained fairly wide-
spread, while selling prices have continued to increase 
at a modest pace. Housing markets have improved 
somewhat except at the high end, while commercial real 
estate markets have been steady to slacker. 
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall, economic activity continued to rise modestly in 
the Third District with continued moderate growth among 
manufacturers and homebuilders. However, activity was 
essentially flat in several other sectors, including con-
sumer spending. Many contacts remained cautiously    
optimistic. In general, employment, wages, and prices 
continued to rise at a modest pace. 
Cleveland 
The economy expanded at a moderate pace, as im-
proved consumer and business expectations have 
boosted activity levels and hiring for some businesses. 
Conditions in manufacturing improved, but some manu-
facturers remain notably cautious. Housing market con-
ditions have cooled slightly but remain above year-ago 
levels. Pressures from input prices continued to rise. 
Richmond 
Economic activity increased at a slightly faster, but still 
modest pace. Warmer weather brought out more tour-
ists, and manufacturing continued to rebound amidst 
stronger new orders, including from overseas. However, 
tighter margins cut into manufacturers’ capital spending 
plans. Labor demand strengthened, but skills shortages 
constrained output in some industries, notably home-
building. Wages and prices rose at a slightly faster pace. 
Atlanta 
Economic activity increased modestly. The labor market 
remained tight with firms noting increased use of training 
programs. Wage pressures were reported for high de-
mand positions. Retail sales were soft. Manufacturers 
noted a solid increase in new orders and production. 
Drought and cold weather impacted agriculture condi-
tions. 
Chicago 
Growth continued at a moderate pace. Employment, 
wages, and manufacturing production grew at moderate 
rates, while prices, business spending, and construction 
and real estate activity increased modestly. Consumer 
spending was flat, financial conditions were little 
changed, and lower crop prices put further stress on the 
agricultural sector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic activity has continued to increase at a modest 
pace. Reports from retail contacts suggest a modest   
uptick in consumer spending after a slow start to the 
year. District activity in natural resource extraction also 
improved modestly from the previous report. February 
District coal production was 10 percent higher than one 
year ago. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity increased modestly 
during the reporting period. The heavy construction, 
manufacturing, energy, and mining sectors saw growth, 
while commercial real estate activity was steady at 
strong levels. Consumer spending was down, and a 
wave of retail closures continued across the District, 
affecting both large and small stores. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased moder-
ately. Manufacturing activity expanded at a strong pace, 
and energy activity continued to rebound following sever-
al years of decline. Consumer spending rose modestly 
with the exception of autos which fell moderately. Agri-
cultural conditions remained generally weak with some 
improvement in cattle and soybean markets. Employ-
ment was modestly higher, and prices rose slightly.  
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately in the Eleventh Dis-
trict. Retail sales growth accelerated slightly, and the 
nonfinancial services sector continued to expand. The 
energy sector picked up notably, and a rebound was 
seen in fabricated metals manufacturing—a segment 
with strong ties to oil and gas. Employment continued to 
rise, and prices generally increased, except in retail. 
Overall outlooks generally improved. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. The labor market continued 
to tighten. Activity in the retail sector improved moderate-
ly, and sales of business services remained strong. 
Conditions in the agriculture sector expanded modestly, 
while activity in the manufacturing sector was stable. 
Contacts reported strong activity in the housing market 
and moderate growth in overall lending activity. 
 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity continued to expand in the First District in recent months, with the year-over-year pace of increase said 
to be modest to moderate. Most responding retailers and all contacted manufacturers and software and information 
technology services firms reported increases in revenue from a year earlier when contacted in early April. Commercial 
real estate markets were somewhat mixed in the region. Residential real estate markets across the region saw price 
increases and sales declines in February compared with a year earlier, which contacts attributed to low inventories. 
Across sectors, hiring was reportedly modest as were wage increases, while many respondents cited difficulty filling a 
range of positions. Retailers and manufacturers said some selling prices were up modestly. Most responding firms cited 
a positive outlook amid some ongoing policy uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets in the First District continued to tighten 
somewhat. Many employers sought to add modestly to 
head counts (although one manufacturer laid off about 4 
percent of staff over the last year), while wage increases 
were modest. Some smaller retailers noted increasing 
labor costs, in part driven by increases in state minimum 
wages being implemented over a multi-year period. 
Restaurant contacts, particularly in heavy tourism re-
gions, expressed concern about possible labor shortag-
es this summer, exacerbated by an expected slowdown 
in granting H-2B visas. Half of contacted manufacturers 
were hiring, though none in large numbers; several firms 
said it was hard to find workers. One respondent said 
that during a recent six-month attempt to add to staff for 
a new product, two-thirds of applicants for assembly line 
jobs were screened out before hiring via math tests and 
drug tests; of 400 workers hired, only 180 worked out.  
All software and IT services respondents said they  
expect to grant wage increases in the low single digits 
and plan net increases in headcount between zero and 3 
percent through the end of the year. They reported that 
high-skill positions such as engineers and data scientists 
were increasingly hard to fill, and covering attrition  
remained a challenge in both technical and unskilled 
areas; for example, one contact noted difficulty covering 
very high attrition in a Maine call center.  
 
Prices  
Business contacts reported modest price increases, if 
any. Retailers said prices remained steady or were up by 
only small amounts. Restaurant respondents said their 
ability to raise menu prices to offset higher labor costs 
was limited by declines in grocery store prices. Pricing 
reports from manufacturers were mixed: six of ten con-
tacts said that input prices had not changed; the others 
generally cited idiosyncratic factors causing price in-
creases. Most manufacturers reported increases in the 
price of the goods they sell but such increases were not 
large. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts consulted for this round reported that 
comparable-store sales between mid-February and the 
end of March ranged from slightly down to mid-single 
digit increases from a year earlier. Some brick and mor-
tar stores have seen a drop in customer traffic, but this 
was balanced by increases in the average sale amount. 
The outlook for 2017 is generally optimistic. 
A contact in the restaurant industry reported that Q1 
sales, when tallied, should be up 1 percent to 2 percent 
over last year, helped by the relatively mild winter. Re-
spondents said expected visa reductions and limited 
ability to raise prices augmented uncertainty about the 
outlook, acting as a check on their plans for expansion. 
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
All ten contacted manufacturers said sales were higher 
in recent periods versus the comparable period a year 
ago. Reports ranged from growth that was slow and 
below expectations for a data and publishing firm to 
“tremendous growth” for a packaging firm. The latter firm 
said that increased e-commerce was driving increases in 
demand for boxes for mailing. Otherwise, firms reported 
sales growth that was in line with expectations. 
Most contacts reported that capital expenditures were 
confined to maintenance of existing equipment. Two 
exceptions were a chemical manufacturer looking for a 
site for a new plant, having exhausted the avenues of 
acquisition and more intensive use of existing facilities 
they used during the great recession, and a manufactur-
er of jet engines which continued to invest large amounts 
in a new product line.  
Several contacts expressed concerns about policy  
uncertainty. A manufacturer of test equipment which 
exports a significant portion of its production worried 
about trade deals. Firms said that a Border Adjustment 
Tax would have mixed effects but hoped for some reso-
lution.  
Software and Information Technology Services 
Firms experienced revenue growth in the range of 1 
percent to 20 percent year-over-year, and even the        
1-percent-growth firm saw “incredible” new orders in the 
first quarter. While health care and health services are 
generally strong in New England, multiple contacts indi-
cated that business sentiment turned positive lately, 
bolstering firms that serve more cyclical industries, such 
as manufacturing and industrial IT.  
All contacts were optimistic. One contact expressed 
concern that continued legislative struggles could put a 
damper on business confidence in the future, and anoth-
er noted that hostile immigration policy could further 
tighten labor markets for skilled and unskilled labor.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Reports on commercial real estate activity in the First 
District were mixed. Contacts in Boston and Hartford 
reported a modest softening of commercial leasing activ-
ity in recent weeks, while activity was reportedly stable in 
Portland and somewhat stronger in Providence. In Con-
necticut the weaker activity extended to both the industri-
al and office sectors. In Boston reports of slower demand 
pertained to the urban office sector, which still enjoyed a 
single-digit vacancy rate. Investor demand for prime 
Boston properties remained strong but price appreciation 
slowed further. 
Office construction activity continued to be restrained 
across the District. Apartment construction activity   
remained significant but the pace of new deliveries 
slowed and the pipeline of planned projects contracted 
somewhat amid evidence of slowing rent growth.     
Respondents noted that borrowing rates for commercial 
property loans were flat despite recent increases in short
-term rates. Most contacts expect further improvements 
in their respective commercial real estate markets mov-
ing forward, but likely at a slower pace. A Hartford con-
tact was somewhat less optimistic, citing drags on 
growth related to severe fiscal strain in his state, while a 
Providence contact was more upbeat, based on signs 
that business confidence in Rhode Island had improved 
recently.   
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District contin-
ued to struggle with a shortage of inventory. All six First 
District states as well as the Greater Boston area report-
ed large declines in inventory for both single-family 
homes and condos from February 2016 to February 
2017. Closed sales also declined in every state and 
Boston for single-family homes. Results for condos were 
mixed, with closed sales increasing in New Hampshire 
and Vermont but decreasing elsewhere. Respondents 
ubiquitously reported strong buyer demand. A contact in 
Boston said: “Sales could have been much stronger had 
the inventory been up. Unfortunately, we’ve noticed that 
potential sellers have become more reluctant to list their 
homes because they are apprehensive that they may not 
be able to find another home themselves.”  
Given the robust demand and low inventory, contacts 
were not surprised that prices generally rose year-over-
year. For single family homes, median sales price rose in 
each state except Connecticut. For condos, prices rose 
in all reporting regions. A New Hampshire contact said 
the low inventory situation and rising prices were 
“particularly hard on first-time buyers struggling to get 
into the market.” In general, contacts saw no remedy for 
ongoing declines in inventories. Most were confident, 
though, that buyer demand would stay strong, even in 
the face of increasing interest rates. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has expanded modestly since the last report, with labor markets remaining tight. 
Input price pressures have remained fairly widespread, while selling prices have continued to rise modestly. Manufactur-
ers noted a deceleration in business activity, following brisk growth in the first two months of the year, while service-
sector contacts have generally continued to report steady to modesty expanding activity. Consumer spending has been 
mixed in recent weeks, even as consumer confidence climbed to a multi-year high. Housing markets were mixed but, on 
balance, somewhat stronger since the last report, although the high end has remained relatively weak. As for commer-
cial real estate, office markets were steady to somewhat slacker, while the industrial market continued to strengthen. 
New construction activity has been sluggish—both on the commercial and residential side. Banks reported that loan 
demand strengthened, while delinquency rates were mostly steady.    
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained fairly tight. Contacts at 
employment agencies continued to report tight job mar-
ket conditions and fairly brisk labor demand—particularly 
for engineers and other tech workers. One New York 
City agency characterized hiring as steady at a moderate 
level, while two others—one in the city and one up-
state—noted a pickup in hiring. However, one noted a 
pullback in hiring in the health insurance industry. 
Manufacturers indicated that they have ramped up hiring 
in recent weeks, and businesses in education & health 
services reported that they have continued to add jobs, 
on net. Employment was reported to be steady to up 
slightly in other service industries. In contrast, contacts in 
the leisure & hospitality industry reported declining em-
ployment. Looking ahead, however, businesses in all 
industries indicated that they expect employment to rise, 
on balance.   
Contacts across all service industries reported moderate 
wage growth and expected this to continue in the months 
ahead.  Employment agency contacts in New York City 
noted some pickup in wages for new job openings, while 
a major agency in upstate New York indicated that wag-
es have held steady.    
 
Prices  
Business contacts reported continued moderate growth 
in input costs but only modest increases in selling prices. 
Manufacturers, retailers and businesses in the leisure & 
hospitality industry anticipated moderate increases in 
selling prices in the months ahead, while those in other 
industries said they expect to keep their prices fairly 
steady. Broadway theaters reported that ticket prices, 
which had increased by more than the seasonal norm in 
the first two months of the year, have returned to more 
normal levels.  
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported that sales were steady to up moder-
ately. Retailers in upstate New York reported that sales 
picked up in March, after a flat February. A major retail 
chain noted that same-store sales were down slightly 
from a year earlier in March but still somewhat ahead of 
expectations. Sales in New York City were on par with 
the region overall, with little adverse effect from the mid-
March snowstorm. Inventories were generally said to be 
at desired levels. Retail contacts have grown somewhat 
more optimistic about the near-term sales outlook.  
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that sales of 
new and used vehicles have continued to be strong in 
both February and March. Inventories of new vehicles 
have remained a bit high for certain makes and models, 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
but are generally at satisfactory levels. Retail and whole-
sale credit conditions were reported to be in good shape, 
though one contact notes tightening for sub-prime loans.  
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) climbed again in March, reaching a 16-year 
high.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that growth in business activity 
has receded from the brisk pace seen in early 2017. 
Businesses in the wholesale trade and transportation 
industries reported steady to moderately growing activity. 
Businesses in manufacturing and wholesale trade re-
mained widely optimistic about the outlook, while those 
in transportation & warehousing have become less up-
beat.   
Services 
Business in most service industries reported little change 
in general business activity since the last report, though 
contacts in education & health services reported steady, 
moderate growth. Looking ahead, businesses were 
generally optimistic about the outlook—particularly those 
in the information and professional & business services 
sectors. However, businesses in the leisure & hospitality 
industry were considerably less upbeat about the out-
look.  
Tourism has been mixed in New York City. Both hotels 
and Broadway theaters have seen a bit of a pickup since 
the last report. However, the outlook for international 
visitors has weakened noticeably: one industry expert 
has observed an increase in cancellations (conferences, 
meetings, school trips, etc), a drop in airline ticketing and 
a marked decrease in inquiries from abroad. At least 
some of this slack is expected to be picked up by an 
increase in domestic visitors.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance a bit stronger since the last report, with 
ongoing slack at the high end of the market. New York 
City’s rental market has been steady to somewhat weak-
er. Landlord concessions have grown more prevalent in 
an effort to keep rents and vacancy rates steady. Effec-
tive rents (factoring in these concessions) have contin-
ued to decline—particularly on larger units and particu-
larly in Manhattan. Elsewhere, rents continued to rise in 
northern New Jersey but were mostly flat across upstate 
New York.  
New York City’s co-op and condo resale market has 
improved somewhat. Sales volume increased, while 
prices were mixed—rising in Brooklyn and Queens but 
slipping in Manhattan. Inventories have risen somewhat 
in Manhattan but remain low; properties have been 
taking longer to sell, and bidding wars have become less 
common. In Long Island, Westchester and Fairfield 
counties, home sales activity was increasingly robust, 
while prices were steady to up only modestly. In upstate 
New York, the market has continued to strengthen, with 
exceptionally low resale inventories boosting prices and 
bidding wars.  
Commercial real estate markets were steady to some-
what slacker in the first quarter. Office availability rates 
rose modestly across downstate New York and northern 
New Jersey but were steady in upstate New York. Ask-
ing rents, on the other hand, edged down in upstate New 
York but were steady to up slightly elsewhere. In New 
York City, office rents were flat but still up roughly 10 
percent from a year earlier. In contrast, the market for 
industrial space has shown continued strength. Industrial 
vacancy rates continued to decline in northern New 
Jersey but leveled off elsewhere; however, asking rents 
continued to rise briskly and were up roughly 10 percent 
from a year earlier across the District. The market for 
retail space has softened noticeably with vacancy rates 
rising and asking rents flat to down modestly.  
Finally, both residential and commercial construction 
were generally sluggish—likely adversely affected by 
wintry weather in March.    
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium sized regional banks reported stronger 
demand across all loan categories—especially residen-
tial mortgages. However, banks also indicated that refi-
nancing activity decreased. Bankers reported that credit 
standards were unchanged. Contacts noted wider 
spreads of loan rates over cost of funds across the 
board, as well as an increase in the average deposit 
rate. Finally, bankers reported an increase in delinquen-
cy rates for C&I loans, but no change in delinquencies 
across other loan categories.  ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace during the current Beige Book reporting 
period. Manufacturing, nonfinancial services, and homebuilding continued at a moderate pace of growth. Five sectors — 
nonauto consumer spending, auto sales, lending, and nonresidential construction and leasing — were essentially flat, 
similar to the prior period. Existing home sales grew slightly after declining last period. According to most contacts, 
employment, wages, and prices continued to grow at a modest pace. Overall, firms continued to expect moderate 
growth over the next six months. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has continued at a modest pace of growth 
since the prior report. A higher percentage of manufac-
turing firms reported increases in employment this period 
than during the prior period. Manufacturers also contin-
ued to note increases in the number of average hours 
worked. Employment indicators from nonmanufacturing 
firms also improved, as contacts reported overall in-
creases in full-time and part-time staff as well as work-
week hours.  
On balance, wage pressures continued to be modest, 
although contacts reported tightening labor markets. A 
majority of manufacturers reported labor shortages and 
skills mismatches, but less than half indicated increasing 
wages as a result. A Pennsylvania staffing firm contin-
ued to see strong demand for staffing services from 
companies across various sectors and noted a stronger 
pickup in wages than usual. Wage pressures remained 
modest for nonmanufacturers, though a slightly lower 
percentage of nonmanufacturing contacts reported wage 
increases this period than during the prior period.  
Prices  
On balance, price levels continued to rise modestly. 
More than two-thirds of firms’ contacts reported no 
change at all in prices paid and prices received. Of the 
remaining firms, more reported increases than decreas-
es with the exception of prices received by nonmanufac-
turing firms, which decreased slightly, on net. Home-
builders noted large increases in lumber and millwork 
costs and continued pressures for labor costs. Overall, 
the sales prices of existing homes rose slightly, although 
this varied across markets and price categories.  
Manufacturing 
Reports from manufacturers continued to suggest overall 
moderate growth. Higher percentages of firms reported 
increases in both new orders and shipments this period 
compared with the prior period.  
Overall, gains in activity were indicated by most major 
sectors, including the makers of lumber products, paper 
products, chemicals, primary and fabricated metal prod-
ucts, industrial machinery, and electronic products.  
Roughly two-thirds of the manufacturing contacts were 
optimistic that orders, shipments, and general activity 
would grow over the next six months, up slightly from the 
prior Beige Book period. Firms also expressed broader 
optimism for future employment and capital expendi-
tures.  
 
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail sales were little changed on balance 
during the period, according to several analysts. One 
area chain reported a good month followed by a tough 
one that was largely impacted by the March snowstorm. 
However, the contact has started to express slight con-
cern of a general slowdown in consumer spending be-
yond the weather impacts, as sales continued to under-
perform expectations. A mall operator noted pronounced 
weakness for winter apparel and also reported mixed 
sales over the Beige Book period — modestly up one 
month then down the next — with only a few retailers 
showing positive trends. Restaurant and food sales at 
malls were also down slightly.  
Auto dealers reported year-over-year sales were flat to 
slightly down this period, after increasing slightly during 
the last Beige Book period. Pennsylvania dealers report-
ed fairly steady activity, slightly up but similar to last 
year. Sales in New Jersey declined relative to last year’s 
levels. Although contacts in New Jersey expressed 
uncertainty about keeping pace with the historic highs of 
the past two years, they expressed optimism that 2017 
would still be a strong year. Dealers also continued to 
face high inventory and difficulty sustaining profitability 
and margins.  
Tourism contacts generally indicated a continuation of 
modest growth. Philadelphia area hotels continued to 
report strong demand. A contact in the Poconos reported 
that while February had been a weaker month because 
of the mild weather, the late-season snowstorm in March 
led to a significant pickup in snow-related activities and 
boosted overall first-quarter performance. A Delaware 
contact noted that traffic counts and spending were up at 
Delaware beaches. In Atlantic City, casino revenues 
flattened this period after posting year-over-year gains in 
the prior period.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Third District service-sector firms continued to report 
moderate growth in general activity, overall, although the 
pace slowed somewhat from the prior period. Responses 
suggested little change in the pace of new orders but a 
slowing in the pace of sales. Expectations about future 
growth, which had tempered during the prior Beige Book 
period, changed little, and contacts remain optimistic. 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Services 
Third District financial firms have reported little change in 
overall loan volumes excluding credit cards since the last 
Beige Book, similar to the prior period. Commercial real 
estate loan volumes grew notably, and volumes of resi-
dential mortgages grew slightly. Home equity loans 
posted modest decreases, and auto loans and commer-
cial and industrial loans decreased slightly. Separately, a 
seasonal decline in credit card volumes that began in the 
prior period continued in this period, with a rate of de-
cline similar to the change observed over the same 
period last year.  
Most contacts continued to report competitive loan pric-
ing and no signs of inflation. In general, banking contacts 
continued to express cautious optimism for slow, steady 
growth.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders continued to report moderate increases in 
traffic, contract signings, and construction backlogs. A 
South Jersey builder noted a continuation of the longest 
run of steady sales (since November) in over 10 years, 
while a Pennsylvania builder started to see more first-
time homebuyers compared with last year. Some con-
tacts wondered if recent interest rate increases helped 
get potential buyers off the fence.  
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
reported a slight increase in existing home sales, follow-
ing a modest decline last period. Contacts continued to 
report low levels of inventory.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts covering much of the 
Third District continued to report little change overall to 
the relatively high levels of construction and leasing 
activity. Contractors noted a slight seasonal lull in con-
struction activity, but they expect a pickup later in the 
year from large projects in the pipeline. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity grew moderately on balance across the Fourth District since our last report. Labor markets continued 
to strengthen, with moderate to strong wage gains. Upward pressure on prices paid by producers increased; selling 
prices rose, though at a slower pace. Consumer spending was stable; Internet and mobile transactions continued to 
offset declines at brick and mortar establishments. New motor vehicle sales strengthened. The outlook by manufactur-
ers noticeably improved as factory output picked up. Nonfinancial services firms experienced moderate revenue growth 
overall. Freight volume expanded over the period, especially for steel, coal, and consumer products. The housing mar-
ket cooled slightly, but unit sales remain above year-ago levels, and selling prices are higher. Commercial builders are 
experiencing stronger than usual inquiries and growing backlogs. Lending pipelines were satisfactory. 
Employment and Wages  
District payrolls continued to expand at a steady, albeit 
slow, pace. Increases were prevalent in the financial 
services, construction, and manufacturing industries. 
Brick-and-mortar retail was the only industry to report an 
overall staffing decline. Here, several contacts an-
nounced job cuts because of store downsizing or clo-
sures. Staffing firms noted that their clients expect that 
both the pace of hiring will pick up as the year progress-
es and the number of openings for permanent jobs will 
rise. One staffing firm reported that billable hours for the 
first quarter were 20 percent higher compared to the 
historic average. Workforce development officials told us 
that while the number of entry-level jobs is rising, finding 
candidates with the required core skills is difficult. Job 
churning has become an issue confronting many hiring 
managers. Wage increases during 2017 are expected to 
average about 3 percent, with significantly higher in-
creases needed to retain high-skilled employees.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on prices paid by producers increased 
over the period. Manufacturers attributed increases to 
the partial recovery in steel and other primary materials 
prices. A homebuilder said that his industry is feeling 
pent-up pricing pressure from materials suppliers. He 
also cited pressures on capacity utilization in the materi-
als manufacturing industry. Oil and gas field materials 
prices moved higher because of the expansion in up-
stream activity. The steepest increases were for steel 
and sand. Even though producer selling prices are rising, 
they have not kept pace with the upsurge in input costs. 
A few contacts noted that productivity increases have 
helped soften margin contraction. Manufacturers, home-
builders, and general building contractors experienced 
little pushback when attempting to raise their selling 
prices. Concerns were raised about rising apparel and 
motor vehicle prices if a border-adjustment tax were 
enacted. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending remains stable. Growth in the num-
ber of transactions completed over the Internet or via 
mobile devices offset declines in brick-and-mortar trans-
actions. Traditional retailers reported that mall traffic 
continues to weaken and that there is less impulse buy-
ing. One chain said that the apparel segment has been 
on a downswing as consumers’ disposable income is 
being allocated for other priorities. Another chain cited 
the unusually warm weather as a factor for the decline in 
purchases of cold-weather merchandise. Retailers noted 
that they have little room to raise shelf prices. As a result 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
of these circumstances, brick-and-mortar retailers are 
cutting back on inventories and capital spending. Year-to
-date unit sales through February of new motor vehicles 
increased more than 5 percent when compared to those 
of the year-earlier period. The share of light truck trans-
actions continues to trend higher.  
Industrial Production 
Manufacturing sentiment has noticeably improved during 
the past couple of months, though a few large manufac-
turers cautioned that the new found optimism may be 
unwarranted. Reasons for the optimism include slowly 
improving global economic conditions, a partial recovery 
in commodity prices, and expectations for tax and regu-
latory reform on the part of the new administration. Activ-
ity for suppliers to aerospace, automotive, construction, 
and Internet-retailing end markets remains elevated. 
Factors tempering output growth include the strong 
dollar and trade policy uncertainty. Year-to-date produc-
tion through February at District auto assembly plants fell 
about 2 percent when compared to that of the same time 
period during 2016. Reports indicated that a growing 
number of manufacturers are expanding capital budgets. 
Additional monies are being allocated primarily for new 
equipment and long-stalled maintenance projects. 
A small rise in oil and gas drilling is spurring additional 
investment in midstream and pipeline projects. Drillers 
are being motivated by a slow upward trend in wellhead 
prices and a need to perform on their leases. With the 
new presidential administration, oil and gas producers 
are hopeful for a less restrictive permitting process. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Year-to-date unit sales through February of new and 
existing single-family homes increased 1.6 percent com-
pared to those of a year earlier. The average sales price 
rose more than 6 percent. Homebuilders reported that 
rising interest rates and rising list prices are motivating 
potential buyers to move off the fence. The impact of 
these factors on demand for new home construction may 
not be known for months owing to the significant time 
lags in the new home buying process. Year-to-date 
estimates of single family construction starts were much 
higher in Ohio compared to a year earlier. Strongest 
demand was found in the first-time and move-up price 
point categories. Sales of high-end homes continued to 
slow.   
Nonresidential contractors reported rising optimism 
across their markets. The number of inquiries was de-
scribed as strong for early on in the year, and backlogs 
are strengthening. Strongest demand was for public 
infrastructure projects, commercial buildings, and ware-
housing and distribution facilities. Contractors noted that 
demand for retail-related work has diminished signifi-
cantly. There is optimism about the impact that national 
infrastructure legislation would have on the construction 
industry. However, if an infrastructure bill were passed, 
the impact would not be felt until 2018 at the earliest.  
Financial Services 
Bankers generally remain satisfied with their credit port-
folios. Although customer confidence is higher, that 
confidence has not yet translated into additional com-
mercial or retail lending. Bank customers seemingly are 
waiting for more definitive proposals on tax and regulato-
ry reform from the new administration before moving 
ahead with projects. On the commercial side, strongest 
demand is for CRE loans and M&A financing. Two large-
bank contacts reported that manufacturers are increas-
ingly turning to non bank sources for capital project 
financing. Several bankers noted a seasonal decline in 
consumer lending overall, especially for credit cards. A 
drop in auto loans was attributed to increased competi-
tion from OEM captives and credit tightening for sub-
prime applicants. A rise in interest rates and low existing-
home inventory were cited as factors for a decline in 
mortgage borrowing.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Professional and business services firms reported mod-
erate levels of activity on balance over the period. 
Strongest demand was seen by bioscience, IT, logistics, 
and management consulting firms. An IT executive re-
ported that year-to-date results have been unusually 
positive so far. A management consultant said that his 
firm has recently seen a broad-based rise in demand. 
Factors contributing to increased demand are a stronger 
economy and a need for assistance in navigating emerg-
ing uncertainties such as changes in health-care laws. 
Freight volume expanded over the period on balance, 
and this expansion was attributed to improving economic 
conditions and lean inventories. Increases were seen 
primarily in shipments of steel, coal, and lower-value 
consumer products. A few carriers reported that they 
were able to push through rate increases. ■  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a slightly faster, albeit still modest, pace than during the previous Beige Book 
reporting period. Manufacturing activity increased amidst reports of stronger shipments and new orders, but tighter 
margins reportedly cut into capital spending plans. Port volumes remained very robust and increased modestly further 
despite some weather disruptions, while reports on other freight were mixed. Retail sales rose at a modest pace while 
tourism activity was boosted by the early arrival of warm weather. Realtors reported an increase in the number of new 
residential listings, but quick sales left inventories unchanged at lower-than-desired levels. Nonresidential leasing activi-
ty advanced modestly while commercial construction was mostly steady. Financial services activity strengthened mod-
estly while nonfinancial services revenues rose slightly. Reports on natural resources were mixed. Labor demand   
remained firm and reports of modest wage increases broadened. Price increases were up modestly, on balance. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks, and wage gains were more widespread. Con-
tacts generally suggested that wage increases remained 
modest, although some firms noted sharper increases 
for high-skill workers who are in short supply. Employ-
ment agencies reported an increase in the number of 
employed workers seeking different jobs, higher turnover 
rates, and more wage pressures. A Virginia recruiter said 
that he was encouraging clients to increase pay rates 
and make quicker hiring decisions when they find the 
right worker. Persistent shortages of skilled construction 
workers adversely affected a larger number of builders, 
and led one South Carolinian to get out of the business 
after 25 years in it.  
Prices  
Recent reports indicated a modest rise in prices. Manu-
facturers’ input prices increased moderately and slightly 
outpaced finished goods price growth, according to our 
most recent surveys. Specifically, prices rose for corru-
gated metal, plastic, and lumber. Meanwhile, services 
prices continued to edge up while retail prices grew 
robustly. House prices rose marginally on average; 
however, some contacts reported stronger price growth 
in areas with low inventories and a scarcity of buildable 
lots. Crop prices varied, with increases noted for peanuts 
and cotton while dairy and grain prices trended slightly 
lower. Energy prices were stable, on balance, with a 
slight decrease noted for Northern Appalachian coal.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity increased as more firms reported 
higher new orders and shipments. Manufacturers of 
electrical equipment, semiconductors, computer prod-
ucts, autos, and fabricated steel noted stronger business 
conditions in recent weeks. Expectations for the next six 
months were positive, and small domestic manufacturers 
were particularly optimistic. Despite that optimism, con-
tacts suggested that persistent labor shortages had 
pushed labor costs up beyond what could be recovered 
through price increases, with the resulting squeeze on 
margins leading to cutbacks in planned capital spending. 
Ports and Transportation 
Shipments through District ports were robust, on bal-
ance, and increased at a modest pace despite some 
disruptions resulting from adverse weather events. More-
over, one official suggested that the typical January/
February slowdown did not occur this year as activity 
remained elevated after the peak holiday season. Strong 
import volumes persisted, and a few contacts noted that 
exports had picked up. One executive said that machin-
ery exports increased recently following a considerable 
period of weakness. 
Reports on truck transportation were mixed. One person, 
whose company delivers directly to end users, reported 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
a slight acceleration in first quarter shipments from 
healthy fourth quarter levels. In contrast, a nationwide 
freight hauler described shipments as “ho-hum” and 
noted that recent improvements in manufacturing indica-
tors were not yet translating into increased truck freight.   
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales continued to expand at a modest pace since 
the last report. Hardware and gardening stores saw 
brisker sales as homeowners took advantage of mild 
temperatures. A sporting goods store manager reported 
stagnant sales though he was optimistic about sales in 
the coming weeks. A furniture retailer said that custom-
ers are building, renovating, and moving again, which 
contributed to an increased pace of sales in the first 
quarter. A large auto dealer reported sales trending up in 
March for both new and used cars.  
Tourist activity picked up beyond normal seasonal trends 
due to unusually warm weather. In the Outer Banks, 
spending on home furnishings and restaurants increased 
as vacation home owners returned to under-take remod-
eling projects. In western North Carolina, hotels saw 
strong corporate bookings and leisure activity at normal 
levels. Convention and tourist activity was at seasonal 
levels in the nation’s capital. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased moderately since 
the previous report. Realtors reported increased buyer 
traffic driven by the early spring weather. Inventories 
remained low; however most realtors contacted said that 
more homes came on the market, but those homes sold 
quickly resulting in unchanged inventory levels. Residen-
tial builders reported that home starts and closings were 
moderate and had increased somewhat. 
On balance, commercial real estate leasing rose moder-
ately. Industrial and retail leasing and sales activity  
remained very active throughout the District. Rental rates 
varied across sub-market and property types, although 
most contacts reported rent increases in the tighter retail 
and office markets. Brokers noted an increase in tenant 
improvement allowances, while free rent incentives 
diminished. Commercial construction generally remained 
steady at modest levels, and multifamily construction 
continued at moderate levels. A broker in Charlotte, 
North Carolina reported an increase in Class A office 
space with new construction hitting the market.   
Banking and Finance 
In general, financial services activity strengthened mod-
erately in recent weeks. Residential mortgage demand 
picked up slightly in the District, with the majority of new 
activity coming from the purchase side as refinance 
lending demand softened somewhat. A South Carolina 
lender noted particular strength in mortgage demand 
coming from new homes. Commercial real estate loan 
demand generally strengthened, but varied throughout 
the District. Non-mortgage business lending rose mar-
ginally while auto lending remained fairly robust. Deposit 
growth was mostly stable, but one lender in West Virgin-
ia noted a slight decline. Interest rates were unchanged 
on balance; however, one lender said that pressure to 
raise loan rates was building. Credit quality was general-
ly cited to be good and improving slightly. Similarly, 
credit standards remained constant even as competition 
among banks remained high.  
Non-Financial Services 
Our most recent survey suggested that services firms 
saw a slight increase in revenues. In general, services 
related to home building, remodeling, and landscaping 
reported the most robust activity. Accounting services 
firms also noted stronger demand as the income tax 
filing season was well underway. Meanwhile, a market-
ing firm indicated that increased business to new clients 
more than offset a slight decline in demand from some 
existing clients. A legal services contact in West Virginia 
said that business was picking up, particularly from 
clients in the construction, health care, manufacturing, 
and mining industries.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Energy reports varied in recent weeks. Coal production 
was flat to marginally lower as prices were slightly down. 
At the same time, natural gas production rose slightly 
and the number of active rigs increased. Agriculture 
conditions were also mixed. Poultry and farming opera-
tions picked up in Virginia and West Virginia. In South 
Carolina, planting season was underway, having been 
somewhat delayed by cold weather. Also, a late winter 
freeze significantly damaged the state’s peach crop. 
Investment in new farm equipment slowed slightly. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic conditions improved modestly from the previous report. The 
majority of contacts remain optimistic in their outlook for growth over the next three to six months. The labor market 
remained tight and wage growth remained stable. Firms characterized non-labor input costs as steady. Retail sales 
softened since the previous report while automotive dealers remarked that sales of light trucks and large vehicles had 
improved. Hospitality contacts noted solid domestic activity. Residential real estate builders and brokers indicated that 
home sales were flat to slightly up. New home construction increased since the previous report. Demand for commercial 
real estate continued to improve and construction increased from the year-ago level across most of the District. Manu-
facturers cited solid increases in new orders and production. Drought and cold weather caused agricultural conditions to 
weaken.  
Employment and Wages  
Firms continued to struggle to find, hire, and hold onto 
quality workers, particularly in skilled technical jobs, but 
also in sales, finance, information technology, and com-
pliance positions. Clerical and other entry-level jobs were 
also reported as increasingly difficult to fill. Leisure and 
hospitality contacts shared that they are exploring auto-
mation options for housekeeping and food preparation 
services. Partnerships expanded with workforce devel-
opment organizations and educational institutions to 
develop custom training programs as a means to build 
larger pipelines of talent. Additionally, firms continued to 
increase investment in internal training programs in order 
to develop otherwise unqualified workers. In spite of 
these efforts, a number of contacts continued to express 
that the inability to find labor was restraining growth. 
Manufacturing, construction, and professional services 
firms reported strong additions to employee headcount 
levels. Reports of turnover increased since the previous 
report, particularly for entry level positions. Businesses 
continued to actively ramp up efforts to reduce turnover 
by offering bonuses, increasing flexible time policies, 
absorbing more healthcare costs, and offering other 
benefits. 
Wage growth remained in the 2 to 3 percent range for 
most job categories, with the exception of stronger wage 
pressures for specialized positions in high demand.    
Prices  
Non-labor input costs were stable and businesses re-
ported pricing power was still constrained. According to 
the Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey, 
year-over-year unit costs were up 1.7 percent in March. 
Survey respondents indicated that they expect unit costs 
to rise 2.1 percent over the next twelve months.   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Most District retail contacts reported that sales levels 
were softer since the last report. They reported that the 
delay in federal income tax refunds weighed down retail 
spending in February. However, merchants expect a 
boost to sales in March following tax disbursements at 
the end of February. Auto dealers noted sales of light 
trucks and large vehicles increased in February com-
pared to a year ago. 
On balance, reports from tourism and hospitality con-
tacts across the District were cautiously optimistic. Con-
tacts in Georgia, Louisiana, and Tennessee reported 
strong tourism activity since the last report; while some 
areas of Florida reported a slight decrease in the number 
of international visitors during the same time period. With 
the exception of South Florida, hotel occupancy and 
revenue per available room were up year-over-year. The 
outlook among most contacts for the second quarter of 
the year remains upbeat.  
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from residential real estate contacts in the Dis-
trict continued to point to slow but steady growth in Feb-
ruary. Most builders noted that construction activity was 
up from the year-ago level. Builders and brokers indicat-
ed that home sales were flat to slightly up relative to one 
year earlier. The majority of builder and broker contacts 
noted that buyer traffic was equal to or higher than the 
previous year’s level. Residential contacts reported that 
inventory levels were similar to or down relative to the 
year-ago level. Builders and brokers noted modest gains 
in home prices. Home sales expectations improved in 
February, with most brokers and builders anticipating 
sales to increase slightly over the next three months 
relative to the year-earlier level. Most builders expect 
construction activity to hold steady at the current pace or 
increase slightly over the next three months. 
Most commercial real estate contacts noted improve-
ments in demand that continued to result in rent growth 
and increased absorption, but cautioned that the rate of 
improvement varies by metropolitan area, submarket, 
and property type. Many commercial contractors indicat-
ed that the pace of nonresidential construction activity 
had increased from one year ago, with many reporting 
backlogs greater than one year. Reports from District 
contacts on the pace of multifamily construction contin-
ued to be mixed, with roughly half indicating that the 
pace increased from the year-earlier level and the rest 
suggesting that the pace leveled off or slowed. Looking 
forward, the majority of District commercial real estate 
contacts expect the pace of nonresidential and multifami-
ly construction activity to increase slightly over the next 
quarter.   
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing contacts reported a solid increase 
in overall business activity compared to the previous 
report. New orders and production levels rose notably 
and finished inventory levels were higher. Purchasing 
managers also indicated that supply delivery times were 
longer. The outlook for future production continued to be 
optimistic, as nearly two-thirds of firms expect higher 
production levels over the next six months.   
Transportation 
District transportation contacts continued to report vary-
ing levels of activity since the previous report. Railroad 
contacts cited a slight uptick in total rail traffic, as large 
increases in shipments of crushed stone, sand and 
gravel, waste and nonferrous scrap metal, were mostly 
offset by declines in petroleum and petroleum products, 
and metallic ore loads. Ports cited robust growth in cargo 
overall, led by significant increases in tonnage of con-
tainerized and break bulk cargo. A majority of contacts 
anticipate activity to remain the same over the next three 
to six months.  
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers, although some small businesses continued to 
experience difficulty obtaining credit. For larger busi-
nesses, private equity sources remained a competitive 
alternative to bank financing. Regulatory capital require-
ments constrained commercial and construction lending 
at some banks. Some bank contacts reported increased 
pricing pressure on deposits.   
Energy  
Reports from energy contacts noted that crude oil inven-
tories remained at historically high levels due to weak 
demand, oversupply, and continued production. Utility 
industry contacts noted continued investments in renew-
able energy. Contacts cited robust construction on gas 
liquefaction plants in southwest Louisiana, however, 
skilled labor shortages were also noted. Operational 
liquefied natural gas plants experienced steady export 
activity.   
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District softened. By 
late-March, drought conditions expanded in the District 
with drought ratings ranging from dry to extreme. During 
the same time period, parts of the District also experi-
enced a cold snap that damaged some fruit and vegeta-
ble crops. There were limited reports of poultry that 
tested positive for avian flu in Alabama, Georgia, and 
Tennessee with stop movement orders, surveillance, 
quarantine, and depopulation employed as containment 
methods. The March forecast for Florida oranges was 
down from February and last season. Some citrus con-
tacts indicated that they are looking for alternative crops 
in light of the chronic problems caused by citrus green-
ing. Contacts continued to report farm consolidations. On 
a year-over-year basis, prices paid to farmers in January 
were up for cotton and soybeans, but down for corn, rice, 
beef, broilers and eggs.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District continued at a moderate pace in late February and March, and con-
tacts expected activity to continue rising at a moderate pace over the next six to twelve months. Employment, wages, 
and manufacturing production grew at moderate rates, while prices, business spending, and construction and real es-
tate activity increased modestly. Consumer spending was flat, financial conditions were little changed, and lower crop 
prices put further stress on the agricultural sector. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a moderate rate over 
the reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue 
to rise at a moderate rate over the next six to twelve 
months. The labor market remained tight. Contacts 
indicated that they were experiencing increased difficulty 
filling low-skilled positions, though higher-skilled workers 
were still in highest demand. Some contacts reported a 
greater willingness to accept less-qualified applicants. 
Staffing firms again reported little change in billable 
hours and ongoing difficulty filling orders at the wages 
employers were willing to pay. One staffing firm indicated 
that they were no longer taking orders from clients in any 
industry offering wages of less than $11 per hour. Wage 
growth continued at a moderate pace. High-skilled occu-
pations were more likely to be given wage increases, 
though there were more reports of increases for produc-
tion workers as well. A number of contacts reported a 
rise in healthcare costs. 
Prices  
Prices again rose modestly overall in late February and 
March. Retail prices increased slightly, though one con-
tact noted that higher freight costs have not yet been 
passed on to consumers. Metals prices were little 
changed overall. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was flat in late February and March, 
though contacts expected the pace of sales to pick up in 
the second quarter of 2017. Contacts noted that above-
average temperatures benefitted sales of home improve-
ment items and building materials at the expense of their 
seasonal businesses. E-commerce activity continued to 
grow strongly. Our District contacts reported a slightly 
higher sales pace of new light vehicles despite less 
generous incentives, with the sales mix continuing to 
shift toward light trucks. Used vehicle sales also in-
creased. 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending slowed to a modest pace in 
late February and March. Most retailers indicated that 
inventories were at comfortable levels, though light vehi-
cle inventories were slightly high. Manufacturing invento-
ries were also at desired levels overall, with the excep-
tion of stocks at steel service centers, which continued to 
be low. Growth in capital expenditures slowed to a mod-
est pace, but contacts expected moderate growth over 
the next six to twelve months. Outlays were primarily for 
replacing industrial and IT equipment, though there was 
an increase in the number of firms reporting spending on 
structures. 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased modestly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction rose 
moderately in recent weeks, and homebuilders also 
noted that inquiries were up compared with this time last 
year. Activity was the strongest in the single-family seg-
ment. Home sales increased slightly overall. Demand 
varied by price range, with strong increases for homes 
under $250,000, modest gains in the $250,000 to 
$500,000 price range, and a modest decline in demand 
for homes over $500,000. Demand for nonresidential 
construction increased slightly, with growth concentrated 
in the retail, industrial, and office sectors. The pace of 
commercial real estate activity increased only a little 
overall, and the gains were limited to the for-lease seg-
ment. That said, a number of contacts reported signs of 
slowing activity, particularly in the retail segment. Com-
mercial rents, availability of sublease space, and com-
mercial vacancy rates were little changed. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production again grew at a moderate 
pace in late February and March. Growth was wide-
spread and conditions in some long-struggling sectors 
improved again. Demand for steel increased to a moder-
ate pace and was stronger than expected. Growth was 
led by demand from the energy sector and steel service 
centers, which were in the process of replenishing low 
inventories. Specialty metals manufacturers also report-
ed higher sales to the energy sector, though contacts 
noted that efficiency gains in the sector over the last 
couple of years have resulted in a notable decline in 
sales volume per barrel of oil produced. Demand for 
heavy trucks increased moderately. Manufacturers of 
construction materials continued to report slow increases 
in shipments, in line with the modest pace of improve-
ment in construction. Activity in the auto and aerospace 
sectors was unchanged, but remained at high levels. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Market participants reported that 
equity prices are high and that volatility remains low. 
Business loan demand increased slightly, with growth 
concentrated in the small business segment. Loan 
standards were about the same and asset quality re-
mained high. Consumer loan demand increased slightly. 
Auto loan demand picked up some, but quality deterio-
rated slightly. Contacts also reported an increase in 
credit card spending and that the pace of residential 
mortgage originations was unchanged. 
 
Agriculture 
Lower crop prices put further stress on the agricultural 
sector. Prices of corn, soybean, and wheat all fell during 
the reporting period. With profit margins looking to be 
higher for soybeans than for corn, demand for soybean 
seeds was high. Recent rains delayed the start of corn 
planting in portions of the District. Additional delays 
could hurt yields, and, because soybeans are planted 
later in the season, could further shift the crop mix to-
ward soybeans. Expectations of low incomes for 2017 
led to lower farmland values and cash rents for cropland 
compared with last year. However, land values for higher 
quality ground and recreational tracts were steady on 
balance. Milk and hog prices were lower, while egg and 
cattle prices moved up. Expectations of falling milk pric-
es and rising feed costs led more dairy operations to lock 
in margins. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts suggest that economic activity in the District has continued to increase at a modest pace since 
our previous report. Overall employment growth was modest, while wage growth remains moderate. Overall inflationary 
pressures remained modest. Reports on consumer spending suggest moderate growth since our previous report, with a 
moderate uptick in auto sales toward the end of the first quarter. Real estate activity was little changed, while District 
banks reported moderate growth in loan demand. Overall activity in agriculture and natural resources remains weak 
because of low commodity prices; however, conditions remain generally unchanged since the previous report.   
Employment and Wages  
Anecdotal evidence suggests modest employment 
growth since the previous report. Several industries 
continue to report shortages of available workers. Con-
struction contacts in Memphis and Little Rock reported 
shortages of workers, and manufacturing contacts re-
ported difficulties in hiring and retaining experienced 
employees. Contacts in transportation and manufactur-
ing reported that growth has been restrained because of 
difficulties hiring experienced workers. 
Contacts reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report. A manufacturing contact in Louisville 
noted upward pressure on wages in the region, with 
employers expecting to moderately increase wages. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that tightness in the labor 
market has resulted in some employers increasing wag-
es to attract employees.  
Prices  
Price pressures in the District remained modest. Busi-
ness contacts did not report changes in overall prices 
charged to customers. Low commodity prices continue to 
put pressure on sectors dependent on the agricultural 
sector. The most-expensive used farm equipment is 
selling at deep discounts at auctions, while equipment 
prices have remained stable or increased slightly for the 
less-expensive equipment. Contacts in Memphis and 
Little Rock reported feed prices have declined, given the 
lower price of corn. Since the previous report, prices for 
coal and rice have remained about the same, while 
prices for corn, soybeans, sorghum, and wheat have 
declined slightly.  
Across the District, home prices continued to increase 
moderately, with contacts in all areas reporting low in-
ventory. Contacts in Memphis and Louisville reported 
rents were modestly higher for Class A commercial 
properties, particularly in some major markets. Price 
pressures from construction materials were mixed. Con-
tacts in Little Rock reported solid wood prices increased 
modestly, while prices for pine saw timber, chips, and 
pulpwood remained flat or decreased slightly since the 
mild winter allowed for an increase in supply. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate consumer spending growth has been mod-
erate since our previous report. Retail sales growth was 
particularly strong in the Memphis area; accordingly, the 
majority of households in west Tennessee continue to 
hold an optimistic outlook for their financial situation for 
2017. Furthermore, the northwest Arkansas region re-
ported record sales tax revenue figures for March. Hos-
pitality contacts in St. Louis and Louisville reported a 
modest to moderate decline in occupancy rates. Reports 
from auto dealers indicate that sales picked up after a 
relatively slow January. Furthermore, multiple dealers in 
the Memphis area noted a shift in demand toward used 
vehicles. 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report. Manufacturing activity in March was 
stronger than one month earlier in both Arkansas and 
Missouri, although the pace of increase slowed slightly in 
Missouri. Many companies reported capital expenditure 
and facility expansion plans in the District, including firms 
that manufacture medical devices, clothing, and chemi-
cal products. However, a number of firms announced 
plans to close facilities, including manufacturers of ma-
chinery, food products, and primary metals. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports of plans in the District’s service sector have 
been mixed since the previous report. In particular, sev-
eral firms that provide transportation, warehousing, and 
information services reported plans to build new facilities 
or expand employment. Two trucking contacts reported 
business is good enough to justify new equipment and 
increased hiring. Reports from the professional business 
services sector were mixed. Some existing employers 
laid off workers but new companies opening in the Dis-
trict were hiring and building facilities. Reports from the 
healthcare sector were mostly negative; layoffs were 
announced in Louisville and Memphis; however, 
healthcare facility expansions were announced in Little 
Rock.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has decreased slightly 
since our previous report. Home sales declined in most 
major metro areas. Local contacts continued to report a 
shortage of inventory relative to strong current demand. 
Concerns about rising mortgage rates were mixed, as 
some contacts indicated that higher rates have had no 
significant effect on the market.  
Residential construction activity has improved modestly 
since the previous report. February construction starts 
were generally flat while permit activity increased moder-
ately. Some local builders reported that speculative 
homes were selling before completion, indicating that 
construction has continued to lag behind demand. 
Commercial real estate activity has been flat since the 
previous report. Local contacts indicated that demand 
has remained steady for most property types. Contacts 
noted some concerns that St. Louis office vacancy rates 
will rise in the near future due to new construction com-
bined with expiring leases of vacant properties. 
Commercial construction activity was mixed. Non-
residential construction started to dip in February.                                                                         
However, recent reports from local contacts were gener-
ally positive, with most seeing either a continuation of 
strong construction activity or an increase in the number 
of projects undertaken. Contacts expect this trend to 
continue through the year. New projects for various 
property types were announced or broke ground, includ-
ing several new hotels, multifamily structures, specula-
tive industrial parks, and mixed-use projects. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking and credit conditions in the District have 
strengthened at a moderate rate since the previous 
report, with some signs of accelerating growth in lending. 
Real estate loan volumes increased at a moderate pace 
over the period with the rate of growth continuing to tick 
upward. However, contacts report that high volume 
lenders are shrinking market areas for multifamily prop-
erties due to softening demand. Meanwhile, commercial 
and industrial lending among District banks rose at a 
moderate to robust rate and markedly outpaced the 
nation in terms of growth. Loans to individuals and 
households continue to expand at a robust rate and 
continue to account for an increasingly larger share of 
outstanding loan portfolios.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agricultural conditions were unchanged from the previ-
ous report and the same time last year. In March, farm-
ers planned to plant about 20 percent more cotton than 
last year, but 20 percent less rice. These movements 
correspond to a continued increase in cotton fiber prices 
and a continued decline in rice prices. With corn and 
soybean prices remaining low, farmers planned to re-
duce corn acreage by 5 percent and increase soybean 
acreage by roughly the same percentage. This planned 
switch in the District’s two largest crops was largely 
driven by the fact that soybeans, with much lower per-
acre costs, require much smaller operating loans.  
Natural resource extraction conditions improved modest-
ly from the previous report. District seasonally adjusted 
coal production grew 4 percent from January to February 
and was 10 percent higher than one year ago.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew moderately, wage pressures 
picked up, and price pressures were modest overall. Activity increased in construction, manufacturing, energy, and 
mining, while commercial real estate activity was flat at strong levels. Tourism activity was mixed, while consumer 
spending and residential real estate were down, and agriculture remained weak. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report, 
checked by tight labor conditions. From February to mid-
March, initial unemployment claims were 14 percent 
lower relative to a comparable period a year earlier, 
dropping in every state except South Dakota. Continuing 
claims were also lower overall. A Minnesota staffing firm 
contact said job orders for seasonal workers in 
landscape and construction started rising due to the 
relatively warmer weather. Firms catering to tourists in 
the Black Hills region reported difficulty finding labor, 
especially seasonal immigrant labor they have 
traditionally used. A Montana source said many firms are 
hiring, “but there’s not enough workforce for all of the 
openings.” The oil-producing region of North Dakota saw 
an increase in hiring, according to a state contact. 
Employer booths at recent job fairs there were sold out 
and had double the job openings of the previous year, 
including one company looking to hire 200 to 300 
certified drivers. There were some notable job losses, 
including 55 at a Minnesota construction firm and 100 at 
a South Dakota senior care organization, along with 
those affected by numerous retail closures across the 
District. But overall, said one source, “the good news 
certainly seems to be outweighing the bad news right 
now.” A survey of employers in District states found that 
their second-quarter hiring outlook was solidly positive 
and more optimistic than a similar, first-quarter survey.  
Wage pressures were moderate to strong since the last 
report. A staffing firm in Minneapolis-St. Paul reported 
that wages have increased by more than 3 percent from 
a year ago; reports from staffing firms in Montana and 
Wisconsin suggested even larger increases. A contact at 
a South Dakota human resources firm said more 
companies were asking for competitive wage analysis 
and, as a result, compensation increases were “above 
normal.” A manufacturing consultant said clients were 
predicting “more aggressive” wage increases than in 
past years. While wages in the Bakken oil region 
remained below their peak, housing allowances and 
daily stipends have come back after being eliminated 
during the oil downturn, according to a source there.   
Prices  
Price pressures were modest overall since the last 
report. A survey of commercial contractors indicated 
acceleration in the price of building materials. A contact 
at an electric utility reported that a proliferation of wind 
energy developments put downward pressure on electric 
rates. Most prices received by farmers decreased in 
February from a year earlier, with the exception of 
soybeans, milk, chickens, and hogs.   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was down modestly since the last 
report. A national department store chain closed 20 
stores across states in the Ninth District. In Grand Forks, 
N.D., alone, three mall-based department stores 
closed—in one case, the closure was due to bankruptcy. 
These and other retail store closures, referred to as a 
“mall quake” by one industry expert in Minnesota, 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
reflected the larger national trend of sales gravitating 
away from brick-and-mortar stores to online sales. A 
national food distributor based in Minneapolis-St. Paul 
saw a 5 percent decline in sales in the most recent 
quarter, and the third straight quarterly decline. In 
contrast, craft breweries in Montana saw record revenue 
increases in sales since the last report and were 
characterized as an “economic engine” for the state. 
Several new grocery stores opened in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul as a new national chain has moved into vacant 
retail locations.  
Tourism 
Tourism conditions were mixed since the previous report 
due to the range of weather conditions across the 
District. Bountiful snowfalls in the mountains of Montana 
extended the ski season for most resorts. However, 
states bordering the Great Lakes experienced 
unseasonably warm weather in February and early 
March, shortening the winter tourism season by a month. 
Small-town ice festivals and Nordic ski races in many 
northern state communities lost weeks of anticipated 
revenues. Hotel occupancy rates in Wisconsin have 
slowed since the last report, according to state officials, 
while in Minnesota, lodging revenue exceeded 6 percent 
annual growth for the fourth consecutive year.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction activity was up modestly since the last 
report. New construction projects out for bid over the 
most recent six-week period (through late-March) 
increased more than 10 percent over a similar period a 
year earlier, according to an industry tracker. A second 
industry database showed strong January-February 
growth in heavy and other nonbuilding construction 
sectors. “We’re anticipating quite a bit of business this 
year,” said a construction material supplier in South 
Dakota. However, commercial construction permitting 
was lower in most District metros compared with the 
same period a year earlier. Residential construction was 
mixed. Many metros have seen fewer units permitted in 
the first quarter compared with a year earlier, but 
Minneapolis-St. Paul saw a strong increase in both 
single- and multifamily units.  
Commercial real estate was flat, but remained solid by 
most measures. Office vacancy rates in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul have ticked higher after significant new office 
development. There were reports of more preleasing 
before new projects move into the construction phase.   
A Minneapolis-St. Paul source noted that retail 
vacancies had crept up to 6 percent, but that “is still 
considered very low. Prime retail areas are very tight and 
have high rents.” Despite significant new construction in 
recent years, office and industrial vacancy rates in Sioux 
Falls, S.D., remained low, while apartment vacancies 
have risen thanks to an influx of new units. Residential 
real estate was lower overall. Some Montana regions 
saw growth in home sales, but sales elsewhere in the 
District were lower, the result of low inventories, 
according to numerous sources, which were leading to 
quicker sales and higher prices. In Rapid City, S.D., said 
one source, sellers “can expect to get full market value.”  
Services 
Professional services activity was up modestly. 
Information technology and software firms in Sioux Falls 
indicated continued growth in sales since the last report. 
Accounting firms across the Ninth District reported a 
normal, seasonal uptick in activity given the tax season. 
Several law firms in the Minneapolis-St. Paul region 
experienced modest growth since the last report, and 
one law firm is appealing to startup companies by 
providing cut-rate legal advice to compete with online 
legal tools. A public relations firm in Minnesota reported 
“steady work,” as did an architectural firm in Fargo, N.D.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions produced by Creighton University indicated 
increased activity in March compared with a month 
earlier in Minnesota and the Dakotas. A medical device 
maker announced an expansion at a Minnesota facility. 
A Michigan firm noted that recent orders were “almost 
double” expectations. Several contacts across the 
District reported increased capital expenditures by 
manufacturers.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak since the 
previous report. Most of the District remained drought-
free heading into planting season. Activity in the energy 
and mining sectors increased modestly since the last 
report. District oil and gas drilling as of late March 
increased from low levels a month earlier. Some 
contacts in the oil-producing region of the District 
expected an increase in activity in April. A copper mine 
and a gold mine were slated for opening later this year in 
Michigan’s Upper Peninsula.  ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased moderately in late February and March, and most sectors expected 
continued growth in future months. Manufacturing activity expanded at a strong pace, and real estate firms reported a 
modest rise in sales. Consumer spending activity rose at a modest pace, and District energy activity continued to in-
crease moderately. Professional and high-tech firms reported moderate sales increases, and bankers reported steady-
to-increased loan demand, stable deposit levels, and unchanged loan quality. Transportation activity declined modestly 
from the previous survey period, and agricultural credit conditions remained weak, with subdued farm income and con-
tinued low commodity prices. Employment and employee hours increased modestly, and wages rose modestly. In most 
sectors, input and selling prices were up slightly over the previous survey period. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment and employee hours increased modestly in 
late February and March, and expectations were for a 
continued increase in the months ahead. Contacts in the 
manufacturing, energy, retail trade, wholesale trade, 
professional and high-tech services, education, health 
services, and tourism and hotels sectors reported an 
increase in employment levels since the previous survey 
period, while contacts in the auto, transportation, and 
restaurant sectors noted a decline. All respondents 
expected a rise in employment in the coming months. 
Average employee hours rose modestly in the manufac-
turing, energy, and service sectors, and additional gains 
were expected moving forward. Respondents noted a 
shortage of commercial drivers, skilled technicians, and 
service workers.  
Contacts in most sectors reported modest wage growth, 
and expectations in the coming months were for moder-
ate wage growth. 
Prices  
In most sectors, input and selling prices were up slightly 
compared to the previous survey period. In the retail 
sector, input prices rose moderately and selling prices 
edged higher. Both input and selling prices were ex-
pected to grow moderately in the coming months in the 
retail sector. Respondents in the restaurant industry 
reported modestly higher prices for both input and selling 
prices. Transportation input prices were up slightly, while 
selling prices increased modestly after falling in the prior 
survey period. Prices in the construction sector rose 
moderately, with additional moderate increases expected 
moving forward. Manufacturers reported slight growth in 
finished goods prices, while raw material costs continued 
to edge higher. Manufacturers expected a slight increase 
in both finished goods and raw material prices over the 
next few months.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity rose modestly in late Febru-
ary and March, while expectations for future growth 
expanded markedly. Retail sales increased over the 
previous survey period, and remained modestly above 
year-ago levels. Several retailers noted an increase in 
sales for outdoor and sale items, while luxury products 
sold poorly. Contacts anticipated sales to rise rapidly in 
the next few months, and inventory levels were expected 
to increase. Auto sales continued to fall at a moderate 
pace, and remained below year-ago levels. However, 
dealer contacts anticipated a strong pickup in sales for 
the months ahead. Auto inventories fell slightly but were 
expected to remain stable in coming months. Restaurant 
sales edged down modestly and were well below year-
ago levels. Contacts expected activity to pick up slightly 
heading forward. District tourism activity increased mark-
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
edly in late February and March and was well above 
year-ago levels. Tourism contacts expected strong activi-
ty heading into the spring months.   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded at a strong pace, and 
most other business contacts reported increased sales. 
Manufacturers reported a rapid expansion in production, 
particularly for metals, electronics, and aircraft products. 
Shipments, new orders, and order backlog all increased 
over the previous survey, and activity was modestly 
higher than a year ago. Manufacturers’ capital spending 
plans expanded moderately, and firms’ expectations for 
future activity were at their highest levels in over twenty 
years.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
wholesale trade firms reported moderate sales increas-
es, while transportation contacts indicated a modest 
decrease in activity. Wholesale trade firms expected a 
strong increase in future sales, while professional, high-
tech, and transportation contacts anticipated a more 
moderate sales improvement. Capital spending plans 
were favorable among most firms. 
Real Estate and Construction  
Overall District real estate activity expanded modestly in 
late February and March, and further gains were ex-
pected moving forward. Residential home sales rose 
moderately since the previous survey period, but were 
slightly below year-ago levels. Residential home invento-
ries were strongly below year-ago levels. Moving for-
ward, contacts projected a solid increase in residential 
sales due to seasonal factors. Home prices continued to 
increase strongly, and sales of low- and medium-priced 
homes outpaced sales of higher-priced homes. Residen-
tial construction activity expanded modestly since the 
previous survey, as construction supply sales, housing 
starts, and traffic of potential buyers rose. Activity across 
the commercial real estate sector activity continued to 
rise at a modest pace as vacancy rates declined and 
absorption, completions, construction underway, sales 
and prices increased. A moderate expansion in the 
commercial real estate sector was expected in the com-
ing months. 
Banking 
Bankers were evenly split between increasing and 
steady overall loan demand in late February and March. 
Regarding specific types of loans, a majority of respond-
ents indicated a steady demand for commercial and 
industrial, commercial real estate, residential real estate, 
agricultural and consumer installment loans. Most bank-
ers indicated loan quality was unchanged compared to a 
year ago. In addition, most respondents expected loan 
quality to remain essentially the same over the next six 
months. Credit standards remained largely unchanged in 
most major loan categories, though almost a third of 
banks indicated lending standards tightened for agricul-
tural loans. Finally, a majority of respondents reported 
stable deposit levels.  
Energy 
District energy activity continued to expand moderately, 
while expectations eased somewhat but remained solid. 
The number of active oil and gas drilling rigs grew mod-
erately, mainly in Oklahoma and New Mexico. Contacts 
reported slight increases in oilfield service costs for 
completions since last year, and some expected further 
increases through the summer. Most respondents ex-
pected oil and gas prices to stay near current levels in 
the coming months. For natural gas, the large supply in 
the Marcellus formation was the main factor keeping 
price expectations low. Some oil and gas firms also 
reported having concerns about labor shortages affect-
ing the near-term growth in activity. 
Agriculture 
Farm income remained subdued in the Tenth District as 
most agricultural commodity prices stayed low. In the 
crop sector, corn and wheat prices declined moderately 
in March and were less than a year ago. Profit margins 
were expected to remain weak for corn and wheat pro-
ducers, although some input costs were expected to 
moderate from last year. Soybean prices also decreased 
in March but were slightly higher than a year ago. With 
soybean prices somewhat more favorable, producers 
were expected to plant more soybeans this year and less 
corn and wheat. In the livestock sector, cattle prices 
increased slightly in March and hog prices remained 
higher than a year ago. Slightly higher prices and lower 
input costs improved profit margins modestly for both 
hog and cattle producers since the last reporting period. 
■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Eleventh District expanded moderately over the past six weeks, with a slight acceleration from 
the prior reporting period. Manufacturing output strengthened further, and activity among nonfinancial services firms 
increased. Retail sales rose at a somewhat faster clip, including a pickup in auto sales. Home sales rose during the 
reporting period, although apartment demand slowed slightly. Loan demand strengthened and the energy and agricul-
tural sectors improved. Employment and wages increased moderately, as did prices. Outlooks generally improved, with 
most contacts expecting 2017 to be stronger than 2016. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose moderately over the reporting 
period. Manufacturers have added to payrolls so far this 
year, in contrast with most of 2015 and 2016 when facto-
ry contacts noted employment declines on net. Hiring in 
the services sector continued, including slight job gains 
among retailers in March. In the energy sector, hiring 
among oilfield services firms picked up notably in the first 
quarter, while some exploration and production firms 
continued to note layoffs. Several contacts speculated 
that employment in the energy sector will not increase 
proportionately with increases in drilling activity because 
of improved production technology and efficiencies. 
Labor market tightness has appeared throughout the oil 
and gas supply chain, with several contacts specifically 
mentioning shortages of truck drivers, and nearly all 
sectors reported upward wage pressures. Some labor 
shortages were also noted by manufacturers and certain 
services contacts, including hospitality. Overall, upward 
wage pressures were similar to the last reporting period.   
Prices 
Prices generally increased over the reporting period. An 
exception was in retail where slight declines were seen, 
partly due to price cuts for new automobiles. Upward 
price pressures in manufacturing eased slightly, retreat-
ing to more normal levels after a few hot months.    
Construction contacts noted higher prices for lumber, 
concrete, plumbing and framing. Oilfield services firms  
increased prices over the past six weeks, with further 
increases expected as demand picks up. 
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector picked up pace 
somewhat over the past six weeks. Output growth re-
mained slightly stronger for durable goods than nondura-
bles, with a rebound seen in fabricated metals manufac-
turing. Exports remained a source of weakness for firms 
that sell internationally. Overall, outlooks stayed positive. 
A few manufacturing contacts noted considerable policy 
uncertainty, especially regarding any changes that would 
impact trade with Mexico. 
Refinery utilization along the gulf coast was healthy. 
Large inventories of product and expectations for softer 
demand growth continue to put downward pressure on 
expectations for refinery margins. Chemical producers 
reported healthy domestic demand for a wide range of 
products and remain optimistic for strong margins this 
year. Comments on international chemical demand were 
mixed, but generally positive. 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Retail sales continued to rise during the reporting period, 
at a slightly faster pace than the prior period. Auto sales 
increased, although a contact noted that demand in 
Houston was weak. Other retail firms also noted slower 
sales in Houston relative to other Texas metros. Con-
tacts again mentioned that the depreciation of the peso 
was harming overall retail sales along the border. Over-
all, outlooks among retailers remained fairly neutral, a 
deterioration from the optimism noted in the prior report-
ing period.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services generally continued to 
increase over the past six weeks, at roughly the same 
pace as seen in the prior reporting period. Professional 
and technical services firms noted particularly strong 
revenue gains, and leisure and hospitality contacts cited 
increased revenues in March after losses earlier this 
year. Transportation services firms also noted revenue 
gains, with rail contacts noting a strong increase in 
crushed stone, which is used for frac sand. Airlines said 
demand was stable over the past six weeks and up from 
a year ago, led by a stronger domestic market. Staffing 
services firms saw a pickup in demand, relative to the six 
weeks prior as well as the same time last year. Demand 
for placements remained particularly strong in Dallas, 
especially in relation to Houston, where contacts noted 
energy firms’ recoveries stalled a bit recently with de-
pressed oil prices. Overall, most services firms noted 
improved outlooks. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose during the reporting period. Contacts 
noted the spring selling season was generally off to a 
good start, with year-to-date sales close to plan for sev-
eral builders. However, buyers were price sensitive, and 
incentives were being offered in some markets, squeez-
ing builders’ margins. Housing affordability continued to 
be a concern. Outlooks were positive, and overall senti-
ment in Houston was better than this time last year.  
Apartment leasing activity slowed and occupancy fell in 
the first quarter. Annual rent growth was solid in Dallas–
Fort Worth but moderated in Austin. Rents were flat to 
down in Houston. Contacts generally expect slower rent 
growth this year.  
Demand for office space was healthy in Dallas–Fort 
Worth, and office construction continued to be elevated 
there. In Houston, office demand was mostly weak and 
office construction tapered. 
 
Financial Services 
Loan demand increased over the past six weeks. Total 
loan volumes expanded, with lenders noting higher 
balances on commercial and industrial loans, as well as 
real estate (both commercial and residential) loans. 
However, contacts reported decreased volumes of con-
sumer loans. Contacts indicated improved loan perfor-
mance and tightened lending standards. More than half 
of lenders noted an increase in loan pricing over the past 
six weeks. Contacts also noted an increase in interest 
rates paid on deposits and rising deposit volumes. Out-
looks were predominantly optimistic, with expectations 
for stronger loan demand and business activity six 
months from now. 
Energy 
Demand for oilfield services improved substantially in the 
district over the past six weeks. Oil and gas activity 
surged, with firms noting a pickup in the Eagle Ford 
Shale as well as the Permian Basin. Several contacts 
mentioned that the accelerating pace may not be sus-
tainable, expecting rig count growth to moderate mid-
year. Outlooks overall for 2017 were more positive than 
in the prior reporting period, especially among oilfield 
services firms, but most contacts noted concern over 
expected volatility. 
Agriculture 
Moisture levels remained favorable across the district, 
with ample rainfall received over the reporting period. 
The winter wheat crop was in good shape, and row crop 
planting continued. Cotton acreage is expected to be up 
sharply in 2017, driven by expectations of higher cotton 
prices this year. Grain prices remained weak and trend-
ed down over the past six weeks. The cattle industry 
benefitted from strong pasture conditions and rising 
cattle prices.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
February through March. The labor market continued to tighten, wage pressures picked up further, and inflation      
increased modestly. Sales of retail goods improved moderately, and growth in the consumer and business services 
sectors remained strong. Manufacturing activity changed little on balance, and conditions in the agriculture sector   
improved modestly. Contacts reported continued strong activity in residential real estate markets, while conditions in the 
commercial sector slowed to a modest pace in some regions. Lending activity grew at a moderate pace. 
Employment and Wages  
The labor market continued to tighten, and wage pres-
sures picked up further. Contacts reported record-high 
demand, as well as wage increases, for engineers with 
experience in cloud computing. Contacts also noted that 
technology and non-technology sectors are increasingly 
competing for workers with the same advanced skills. In 
the financial services sector, wages for unskilled entry-
level positions increased markedly. Labor shortages in 
the construction industry persisted, driving up wages for 
skilled workers. Demand for labor in the agriculture 
industry continued to outpace supply, putting upward 
pressure on wages. One contact noted that growers 
continue to automate production where possible. Con-
tacts in the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry  
reported relocating workers and operations to lower-cost 
locales outside of the District. 
Prices  
Overall, inflation increased modestly over the reporting 
period. Prices for construction materials continued to 
climb as construction activity remained strong. Increas-
ing wage costs pushed up hotel rates and prices for 
associated services such as parking and food and bever-
age services. Shipping costs increased moderately. 
Contacts in the retail food and beverage industry report-
ed that increases in labor costs were passed through to 
consumers. Prices of agricultural commodities picked up 
modestly. Branded pharmaceutical price increases  
remained subdued, while strong competition held down 
prices for generic drugs. Improved economies of scale 
reduced cloud computing costs, while prices for high-end 
smartphones and tablets continued to trend downward. 
Wholesale food retailers reported slight year-over-year 
deflation. 
Retail Trade and Services 
Activity in the retail sector improved moderately over the 
reporting period. Overall, retail sales experienced steady 
growth, but consumer preferences continued to shift 
from buying in-store to using e-commerce. Vehicle sales 
rebounded strongly from a weak start to the year, and 
dealers reported low inventories of used vehicles. Sales 
of retail beverage products were stable, although an 
unusually wet winter in the West somewhat slowed foot 
traffic at many vendors. Optimism among grocery retail-
ers boosted capital expenditures on store improvements 
and new location openings. 
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
remained strong. Shipping volumes continued to expand 
at a solid pace, and contacts noted that volume growth 
was particularly strong for lower-priced e-commerce 
goods. Demand for business IT services strengthened, 
driven by increased investments in cloud services, mobil-
ity, and big data solutions in the financial services,   
manufacturing, and health-care sectors. Contacts in the 
The Beige Book ■ April 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
hospitality industry reported that overall sales improved, 
but mentioned that hotel stays were lower than expected 
due to changes in immigration policy and increased 
scrutiny of foreign arrivals. Demand for restaurant ser-
vices remained sluggish, but the industry remains hope-
ful that the recent slump in sales is transitory and    
expects sales to increase in the coming months as the 
weather improves and consumers receive tax refunds. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity was mixed across sectors but 
largely flat on balance over the reporting period. Condi-
tions in the semiconductor industry were healthy, and 
consolidation in the industry picked up significantly. 
Orders for new commercial aircraft were up over the 
same period last year, while shipments remained stable. 
On balance, exports of manufactured goods continued to 
be held back by the strong dollar. However, demand for 
domestic steel picked. Overall, contacts reported that 
capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector remained 
below long-run averages. 
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector grew modestly over the 
reporting period. Increased water availability in the West 
boosted yields for some crops. A greater-than-
anticipated snow cover in parts of the West spurred 
ranchers to increase herds’ food allowances, boosting 
the demand for hay. Oil production remained stable in 
Alaska, but relatively low oil prices have slowed invest-
ment substantially. The strong dollar held back exports 
for some agricultural products. On balance, growers 
anticipate that rising global economic activity will yield 
additional demand for domestic exports this year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Real Estate and Construction 
Conditions in real estate markets remained stable, and 
activity remained strong in most of the District. Demand 
for residential real estate remained robust in most parts 
of the District. Overall, contacts reported that construc-
tion activity was slowed only by a lack of available land, 
labor, and materials. Sales of new and existing homes 
were robust, and inventories remained low, with one 
contact in Seattle reporting that new property listings 
remained on the market for only a couple of days.  A few 
contacts outside of major metropolitan areas reported 
that recent increases in mortgage rates had caused 
demand to slow modestly, although it remained strong. 
House prices and rents continued to increase, particular-
ly in cities, where some contacts noted that both rose at 
a faster pace than wages. In some regions, activity in the 
commercial real estate sector slowed to a modest pace. 
In Alaska, residential and commercial construction activi-
ty declined, as commercial investment stalled and overall 
economic activity remained sluggish. 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew at a moderate pace over the   
reporting period. Loan demand continued to expand at a 
moderate pace, and contacts reported that competition 
on pricing and fees remained high. Deposits expanded 
moderately and were sufficient to finance lending activi-
ties. On balance, credit quality remained strong, but one 
contact pointed to some loosening of underwriting stand-
ards. Commercial banks’ net interest margins improved 
modestly with recent increases in broad market rates. 
One contact in the Pacific Northwest reported that the 
continued growth of credit unions threatened smaller 
community banks in their region. ■ 


