The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
January 18, 2017 
January 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston based 
on information collected on or before January 9, 2017. This document 
summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal 
Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal 
Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Reports from the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicated that the economy continued to expand at a modest pace 
across most regions from late November through the end of the year. Manufacturers in most Districts reported in-
creased sales with several citing a turnaround versus earlier in 2016. Growth in the energy industry was mixed; two 
Districts reported weakness in coal production but others reported improvements in coal, oil, or gas activity. Most Dis-
tricts said that non-auto retail sales had expanded, but several noted that sales over the holiday season were disap-
pointing and reports in more than one District suggested that growth in e-commerce had come at the expense of bricks
-and-mortar retailers. All Districts reported varying degrees of growth in employment and a majority described their 
labor markets as tight. Residential construction and sales were generally mixed, although San Francisco reported 
strong real estate market activity throughout the 12th District. Financial conditions were stable. Firms across the coun-
try and industries were said to be optimistic about growth in 2017. 
Employment and Wages 
Labor markets were reported to be tight or tightening during the period. Employment growth ranged from slight to mod-
erate and most Districts indicated that wages increased modestly. A couple of Districts mentioned layoffs, but even in 
those Districts, as in other regions, most responding firms were said to have added employment, on net. District reports 
cited widespread difficulties in finding workers for skilled positions; several also noted problems recruiting for less-
skilled jobs. Wages in some Districts were pushed up a bit by increases in the states’ minimum wages and most Dis-
tricts said wage pressures had increased. Many Districts said contacts expect labor markets to continue to tighten in 
2017, with wage pressures likely to rise and the pace of hiring to hold steady or increase. 
Prices 
Pricing pressures intensified somewhat since the last report. Eight out of twelve Districts saw modest price increases 
and the remainder experienced slight increases, or flat prices in the case of the Atlanta District. Increases in input costs 
were more widespread than increases in final goods prices. Cost increases were reported for coal, natural gas, and 
selected building and manufacturing materials. Retailers’ selling prices were mixed, but on balance were flat or down 
amidst competitive discounting. Prices of most agricultural commodities stayed flat at very low levels. Home prices 
were stable or up modestly. Businesses in several districts reportedly expect further modest increases in input costs 
and selling prices in 2017. 
Boston 
Economic activity in the First District expanded at a 
modest to moderate pace in the final weeks of 2016. 
Firms undertaking hiring cited difficulties finding employ-
ees; a contact in the restaurant industry, in particular, 
noted worker shortages. At the same time, most employ-
ers said they were not raising wages substantially. Busi-
ness contacts remained optimistic about 2017. 
New York 
Economic activity has held steady. Labor markets re-
mained tight and wages continued to grow moderately. 
Input cost increases have become increasingly wide-
spread, and selling prices have increased at a somewhat 
faster pace. Housing markets have continued to weaken 
at the high end, while commercial real estate markets 
have slackened. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall economic activity appeared to pick up to a mod-
est pace of growth in the Third District with nonauto retail 
sales, nonfinancial services, and manufacturing provid-
ing the boost from the prior period of slight growth. Hiring 
also rose to a modest pace, and tightening labor markets 
sustained modest pressure on wages and prices. 
Cleveland 
Economic activity in the Fourth District grew slightly. 
Labor markets showed signs of tightening. Upward 
pressure on selling prices increased. Retail sales disap-
pointed, while motor vehicle unit sales increased. Resi-
dential and commercial construction activity remains 
elevated. Activity in the energy sector edged higher, and 
manufacturing output was little changed. 
Richmond 
Economic activity increased at a moderate pace on 
balance, with strengthening in the manufacturing sector. 
Retail sales also grew at a faster pace since the previous 
report. Real estate agents reported strong industrial 
leasing, with more e-commerce tenants looking for large 
facilities. Stronger multi-family construction was reported 
in Washington, D.C., Charlotte, North Carolina, and 
Charleston, South Carolina. 
Atlanta 
Economic activity expanded modestly. Retailers cited an 
increase in sales. Home prices increased modestly. 
Commercial real estate contacts continued to indicate 
improving demand. Manufacturers noted an increase in 
new orders and production. The labor market remained 
tight and wages were stable. Non-labor input costs re-
mained relatively unchanged. 
Chicago 
Growth in the Seventh District continued at a modest 
pace. Manufacturing production grew at a robust rate, 
business spending grew at a moderate rate, consumer 
spending increased modestly, and construction and real 
estate activity edged up. Financial conditions improved 
some, prices increased modestly, and farm incomes 
were little changed. 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions in the Eighth District continued to 
expand at a modest pace. On a positive note, District 
contacts anticipate an uptick in consumer spending 
activity in early 2017. Conversely, low commodity prices 
continue to put many agricultural parts of the District 
under financial stress. 
Minneapolis 
Economic activity in the Ninth District grew modestly. 
Consumer spending was lower than expected through 
the holidays, though winter tourism started well. Manu-
facturing activity picked up, and the outlook for the sector 
appeared more optimistic. Commercial construction held 
steady at high levels, but heavy and residential construc-
tion lagged. Homes sales were strong in most regions. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity in the Tenth District expanded modest-
ly in late November and December. Consumer spending 
increased, and contacts expected moderately higher 
sales in the months ahead. Manufacturing production, 
shipments, and new orders grew at their fastest pace in 
over two years. The energy sector expanded further, and 
higher energy prices led to continued optimism in the 
sector. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately in the Eleventh Dis-
trict, and outlooks were more optimistic than the previous 
report. The energy sector noted improved demand and 
an uptick in employment, following depressed activity for 
nearly two years. Manufacturing activity expanded, 
although job growth remained weak. Retail sales contin-
ued to be weak in energy-related and peso-sensitive 
areas. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Holiday retail sales picked 
up, and activity in the services sector remained strong. 
Conditions in the agricultural sector were mixed, while 
activity in the manufacturing sector was stable. Contacts 
reported strong activity in the housing market and mod-
erate growth in overall lending activity. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity continued to expand in the First District at the close of 2016. Both retailers and manufacturers cited 
modest to moderate increases in revenues in recent weeks compared with a year earlier. Software and information 
services firms reported strong order increases in the fourth quarter. Commercial real estate markets were mostly steady 
in the region; in the Boston area office rents increased and sales prices for commercial properties were stable. Residen-
tial real estate markets across the region continued to experience increases in both sales and prices. Although none 
sought substantial additions to headcount, a number of firms reported difficulty finding workers to fill openings. Prices 
were largely stable. Most responding firms cited a positive outlook, expecting end-of-year growth rates to continue in 
2017. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts in multiple sectors mentioned tightening labor 
markets. For example, one retailer reported that their 
firm’s labor costs went up 5 percent in 2016 because 
they had to pay more to attract workers and they faced 
state-mandated minimum wage increases. A majority of 
manufacturing contacts reported that they were actively 
recruiting and half indicated that they were struggling to 
find workers. Manufacturers’ mentions of hiring difficulty 
extended across both skilled and unskilled workers and 
appeared to be an issue all across the region, including 
western Massachusetts, central Connecticut, and Rhode 
Island, as well as the Boston area. Software and IT 
services respondents kept headcounts relatively stable 
this past quarter and raised wages by mid-single digit 
percentages.  
Prices  
Retailers reported that input and selling prices remained 
generally steady. Manufacturing contacts similarly did 
not report exceptional pricing pressure from either cus-
tomers or suppliers. A global supply glut of selected 
chemicals reduced prices of both those chemicals and 
products made with them. A supplier to the auto industry 
expressed concern that high levels of inventory in the 
auto business would lead to discounting and, in turn, 
price-cutting pressure on suppliers as occurred in the 
mid-2000s. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts consulted for this round reported that 
sales growth was generally good between mid-
November and early January. In one case, this more 
positive recent trend made up for lower-than-expected 
sales earlier in 2016, which were partly driven by weath-
er. Apparel sales were up, but demand for hardware 
items was reported to be down. Two respondents con-
cluding their fiscal years on December 31 reported 2016 
sales increases ranging from 1 percent to just over 3 
percent. Another contact cited preliminary 2016 sales 
increases in the mid-single digit range. Continued mod-
est sales growth is expected for 2017. 
A contact in the restaurant industry reported that sales in 
December were generally good, which he indicated 
serves as a positive predictor for the next couple of 
months, as customers spend gift cards purchased during 
the holiday season. Locally owned restaurants were said 
to be doing better than the larger publicly-traded chain 
outlets. This respondent expected that overall restaurant 
sales will be up 1 to 2 percent for 2016. Looking forward, 
there was concern that a tight labor market combined 
with increases required by minimum wage laws will stifle 
restaurant expansion and job growth over the next few 
years, and some sense that this trend has already start-
ed. Restaurant expansion may also be limited by rising 
real estate costs.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
All eight manufacturers contacted this cycle reported 
higher sales versus the same period a year earlier. A 
sporting goods manufacturer reported robust year-over-
year sales increases in the fall but does not expect that 
pace to continue. A manufacturer and retailer of furniture 
reported that sales slowed in mid-November but recov-
ered in the balance of the year and were up slightly 
versus the year-earlier period. A toy maker reported 
exceptionally strong sales in the fourth quarter. A manu-
facturer of components for capital goods said that the 
second half of 2016 was better than the first half.  
Most respondents reported higher capital expenditures 
but none reported major revisions to spending plans. 
Information technology remained a major area of capital 
expenditure for several firms. A manufacturer of compo-
nents for capital goods said that new technologies were 
allowing firms to get more out of existing equipment and 
that this was depressing capital expenditures.  
All the contacted manufacturers cited a positive outlook 
notwithstanding some uncertainty about the impact of 
possible policy changes by the new administration.  
Software and Information Technology Services 
Contacts in software and IT services—with a very limited 
number of respondents—reported mixed revenue results 
near the end of 2016, but strong demand in Q4. A 
healthcare software firm reported a slight decline in 2016 
revenue from 2015, though they attributed this to ac-
counting changes more than a real decline in business. 
They experienced a “huge” Q4 for new orders, and thus 
were gearing up for a strong 2017. The contact identified 
uncertainty surrounding the future of the Affordable Care 
Act as a possible headwind for their hospital clients. An 
IT firm selling to manufacturers summed up 2016 as “a 
stable year after a rocky 2015.” They reported high sin-
gle-digit growth in bookings in Q4 over last year. The 
contact was hopeful that manufacturing will continue to 
recover in the coming year, possibly including tailwinds 
from the incoming administration. However, they ex-
pressed concern about a resurging U.S dollar.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Conditions in commercial real estate markets across the 
First District were stable in recent weeks. Office leasing 
activity was steady or modestly slower in the region’s 
major metro areas. Investment sales activity and sales 
prices for prime commercial properties in Boston were 
also stable, as foreign investors were undeterred by 
higher interest rates and a stronger dollar. One contact 
estimated that office rents in greater Boston increased 
10 percent on average in 2016. Apartment construction 
activity slowed in recent months in both Boston and 
Portland, while office construction was stable at a slow 
pace in Boston and minimal in the rest of the region.  
The outlook among contacts was cautiously optimistic, 
with significant uncertainty related to domestic politics. 
Contacts across the District expected capitalization rates 
to increase in 2017 to keep pace with rising interest 
rates, noting that such increases imply that rents will 
have to increase and/or valuations will have to decrease. 
On balance, contacts anticipated that property values will 
remain flat in 2017. Apartment construction activity was 
expected to slow further in coming months as borrowing 
costs continue to rise and lending terms continue to 
tighten, but prospects for new office construction ap-
peared brighter for 2017 in light of rising office rents and 
low office vacancy rates around the region.  
Residential Real Estate 
Continuing recent trends, residential real estate markets 
in the First District showed robust increases in sales and 
prices relative to last year. Closed sales for single-family 
homes and condos increased in all six First District 
states as well as in the Boston metro area (five of the six 
First District states and Boston reported changes from 
November 2015 to November 2016; Maine reported on 
October 2015 to October 2016). Massachusetts record-
ed the most closed sales on record for the month of 
November. As usual, many contacts cited falling invento-
ries as an issue: inventories decreased year-over-year in 
every reporting region. A contact in Massachusetts re-
ported that “with such little inventory, buyers needed to 
be quick with their best offers from the start.”  
Home prices also rose year-over-year. For single-family 
homes, the median sales price increased in every report-
ing region. The same was true for condos, except in 
Vermont where prices decreased slightly.  
Overall, contacts were optimistic about the outlook for 
the end of the year and into 2017. Many said rising inter-
est rates would stimulate buyers to make offers at the 
end of 2016, but they did not expect further moderate 
increases in interest rates to restrain the region’s con-
sistently strong buyer demand.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has held steady since the last report, while labor markets have remained fairly 
tight. There have been increasingly widespread increases in input costs and scattered signs of a pickup in selling prices. 
Manufacturers indicated that business rebounded following an autumn slump, while service-sector contacts reported 
steady to moderately expanding activity. Consumer spending has been mixed, even as consumer confidence climbed to 
a multi-year high. Housing markets have been mixed, with weakness continuing at the high end, and commercial real 
estate markets were steady to somewhat slacker. Residential construction was sluggish, while there has been some 
pickup in office and especially industrial construction. Banks reported that both loan demand and delinquency rates 
were steady to moderately improved.   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained fairly tight, while hiring 
activity has been mixed. Businesses in most service 
industries reported that they have been hiring, on net, 
while manufacturers indicated that they are keeping 
headcounts steady. On balance, contacts said they plan 
to increase headcounts in the months ahead, particularly 
manufacturers. Contacts at employment agencies re-
mained fairly upbeat about the job market, though they 
said it was hard to judge during this typically slow sea-
son. Still, an upstate New York agency noted that hiring 
remained fairly strong longer into December than usual 
and a New York City agency reported that hiring has 
picked up surprisingly early in January.  
Contacts generally reported only a very modest pickup in 
wage growth, though contacts in service industries indi-
cated that they anticipate rising wages in the months 
ahead—particularly in education and health, retail, 
wholesale and distribution industries. Though New York 
State raised its minimum wage structure on January 1, it 
is too early to assess its effects.    
Prices  
Business contacts reported some pickup in both input 
prices and selling prices. Manufacturing contacts noted 
particularly widespread price increases, while most 
service sector contacts noted only scattered increases. 
Both manufacturers and service firms also said they 
anticipate increasingly widespread cost increases in the 
months ahead. Retailers generally maintained that sell-
ing prices were steady to down slightly. Broadway thea-
ters reported that ticket prices have increased by consid-
erably more than the seasonal norm during this past 
holiday season. 
Consumer Spending 
Retail merchandise sales were mixed but generally 
sluggish in November and December. Two major chains 
reported that same-store sales were down moderately 
from 2015 levels and below plan, though one noted that 
its on-line sales were up by double-digit percentages. By 
contrast, business picked up for upstate New York retail-
ers. Cold weather reportedly boosted sales of winter 
apparel and outerwear. Despite the disappointing sales 
performance, inventories were said to be at reasonably 
satisfactory levels. Retail contacts were generally not 
very optimistic about the near-term sales outlook.  
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that sales of 
new and used vehicles picked up in the final two months 
of the year. Inventories of new vehicles have remained 
on the high side. Retail and wholesale credit conditions 
were reported to be in good shape.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) surged in December, reaching its highest level 
in more than nine years. 
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has picked 
up noticeably since the last report and expressed in-
creased optimism about the near-term outlook. Similarly, 
businesses in the wholesale trade and transportation 
industries reported widespread improvement in business 
activity and were increasingly optimistic about future 
business conditions.   
Services 
Service-sector businesses reported steady to slightly 
improving business conditions since the last report. 
Looking ahead, these businesses were generally opti-
mistic about the outlook—particularly those in the infor-
mation and professional & business services sectors. 
Tourism activity has remained sluggish, as hotel busi-
ness and Broadway theater attendance were flat to down 
from a year earlier.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets have been mixed across the District 
since the last report, with weakness continuing at the 
high end. New York City’s rental market has weakened 
noticeably, as rents for smaller units have leveled off, 
while rents of larger units have declined. Apartment rents 
elsewhere have been mostly flat of late, but still up mod-
estly from a year earlier. Rental vacancy rates have 
increased in New York City, as well as across upstate 
New York, while they have edged down in northern New 
Jersey.  
New York City’s co-op and condo resale market has also 
weakened. Both sales activity and prices have slipped, 
except on small and moderately priced units. Bidding 
wars have become considerably less prevalent than 
earlier in the year. Elsewhere across the District, condi-
tions have been more mixed. Home sales in the suburbs 
around New York City picked up considerably, though 
prices have remained fairly stable. In upstate New York, 
the market is still characterized as quite strong. Sales 
activity has been fairly robust for this time of year, inven-
tories have remained tight, prices have continued to 
climb and sellers have continued to see multiple offers 
above the listing price. In contrast, home prices have 
remained generally flat in northern New Jersey, though 
activity has picked up somewhat.  
 
Commercial real estate markets were steady to some-
what slacker in November and December. Office availa-
bility rates rose modestly in upstate New York, Long 
Island, Westchester and Fairfield counties, while rates 
remained steady in New York City and Northern New 
Jersey. Asking rents for office space were flat to up 
modestly in most of the District, though they declined in 
upstate New York. In contrast, the market for industrial 
space has shown continued strength. Across the New 
York City metro area, industrial vacancy rates have 
declined further and rents have risen fairly sharply. In 
upstate New York, though, vacancy rates have been 
mostly flat, and rents have edged lower.   
New multi-family development has been weak in most of 
the District, except in northern New Jersey where it has 
held steady at a strong level. Single-family construction 
has remained sluggish across the District. Office con-
struction has picked up somewhat in Manhattan but has 
been flat to down modestly across most of the District.   
Banking and Finance 
Small- to medium-sized banks reported strengthening 
demand for commercial mortgages but little change in 
demand for consumer loans, residential mortgages, and 
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans. Bankers reported 
that credit standards were unchanged across all loan 
categories. No change was reported in spreads of loan 
rates over cost of funds across all loan categories except 
C&I, for which banks reported wider spreads. Bankers 
indicated lower delinquency rates for commercial mort-
gages and C&I loans but no change in delinquency rates 
for the remaining loan categories.  ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District grew at a modest pace during the current Beige Book reporting period 
— a bit faster than the prior period. Notable shifts in activity included nonfinancial services and existing home sales, 
which improved to a moderate pace of growth. Four sectors — nonauto consumer spending, manufacturing, and non-
residential construction and leasing — improved to a modest pace of growth. Employment growth also picked up to a 
modest pace. This pickup included manufacturing firms, which had been reporting job losses for much of the year. 
Contacts continued to report that wages rose modestly as the labor market continued to tighten. On balance, general 
prices also continued to grow at a modest pace. Overall, firms continued to expect moderate growth over the next six 
months. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has picked up notably to a modest pace of 
growth since the prior report. Manufacturing firms noted 
an increase in employment for the first time in a year, 
while average hours worked lengthened for the second 
consecutive month. Employment indicators from non-
manufacturing firms improved, as contacts reported 
increases in the use of full-time workers and part-time 
hires and in workweek hours.  
However, descriptions from staffing firms were mixed, 
with Pennsylvania firms noting some quieter-than-normal 
lulls around the holiday season, while a New Jersey firm 
reported finishing strong through year-end.  
On balance, wage pressures continued to be modest 
although the labor market has tightened for many occu-
pations, according to banking and staffing contacts. One 
staffing contact described the labor market as tightening, 
with wages trending up and more turnover in mid-market 
placements; the contact also noted that small business-
es will have to raise wages to remain competitive. Manu-
facturing contacts estimated that wages and nonhealth 
benefits would increase 2.0 percent to 2.5 percent in 
2017 and that total compensation, including health bene-
fits, would rise 3.5 percent to 5.5 percent.  
Prices  
On balance, price levels continued to rise modestly. 
Although about 70 percent of the firms reported no 
change at all in prices paid and prices received, more of 
the remaining firms reported increases than decreases. 
The differential was similar to last period for prices paid 
but diminished for prices received.  
Retail analysts used the term “price deflation” to depict 
the deep discounting of many retailers throughout the 
holiday sales period. Overall, home prices continued to 
rise slightly, although this varies across markets and 
price categories. Both residential and commercial devel-
opers have noted the high cost of developable land.  
Manufacturing 
Overall, manufacturing firms reported modest growth — 
noting improvements in general activity and shipments, 
for which over one-third of the firms reported increases. 
New orders also continued to grow, but with somewhat 
fewer firms noting increases compared with the prior 
period.  
The makers of paper products, chemicals, and primary 
metal products noted overall gains in activity from the 
prior period, while the makers of lumber products noted 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
weaker activity. Fabricated metals, industrial machinery, 
and electronics firms reported mixed results.  
More than half of the manufacturing contacts were opti-
mistic that orders, shipping, and general activity would 
grow over the next six months. Firms also expressed 
broader optimism for future capital expenditures and 
employment.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail sales grew modestly over the holiday 
sales period, according to several analysts. They also 
noted that retailers offered heavy discounts on many 
items even before Black Friday and maintained these 
bargains throughout the season. Our contacts anticipate 
that while some retailers succeeded in clearing their 
shelves and creating the opportunity to restock with new 
inventory, they may have constrained their profits. Cus-
tomers were described as “more savvy with technology” 
and as spending more money per trip.  
Auto dealers described light vehicle sales as holding 
steady at high levels through year-end. Annual sales 
figures were estimated to finish slightly above those of 
2015. For New Jersey, this meant a second consecutive 
sales record. Generally, dealers do not expect an in-
crease in 2017 but hope sales will remain at or near 
2016 levels.  
Tourism contacts generally indicated a continuation of 
modest growth relative to the high levels of the prior 
year. Philadelphia area hotels set records for a third 
consecutive year. A shore location contact boasted an all
-time record December — the third record month in the 
past year. Mild winter weather helped boost traffic at 
shore locations over the holidays, filling restaurants and 
retail shops. However, casino revenues in Atlantic City 
continued to decline against prior-year levels.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Overall, Third District service-sector firms reported that 
activity picked up to a moderate pace of growth. Con-
tacts also noted that the pace of sales and new orders 
improved. However, reported expectations of future 
growth have outpaced reports of current growth, though 
falling shy of many other reports over the past six years. 
Financial Services 
Third District financial firms reported modest growth of 
total loan volume, a bit off the moderate pace of the prior 
Beige Book period. However, the significant seasonal 
increase in credit card volumes anticipated for the recent 
holiday period was much larger in 2016 than in 2015.  
Commercial real estate loans and commercial and indus-
trial loans continued to be two of the fastest growing loan 
categories; however, both grew at a slower pace than 
during the same period one year ago. Volumes of home 
mortgages, home equity loans, auto loans, and other 
consumer loans were mostly unchanged over the current 
Beige Book period.  
On balance, banking contacts continued to report 
healthy loan portfolios and improving customer credit 
quality. In addition, several contacts noted holding the 
line on their own credit standards against more lenient 
terms and conditions offered by competitors.  
Several contacts noted that the recent optimism and 
enthusiasm expressed by Main Street firms and Wall 
Street investors have not yet translated into tangible 
business investment. Overall, banking contacts contin-
ued to express cautious optimism for slow, steady 
growth, and are not yet convinced of potentially greater 
growth.  
Real Estate and Construction 
On balance, homebuilders continued to report little 
change in activity. However, reports were mixed: Penn-
sylvania builders of mid-priced homes noted a pause in 
activity, while a South Jersey builder of higher-priced 
homes reported a pickup at year-end with strong back-
logs going into January.  
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
reported an upsurge in home sales to a moderate pace 
but noted that this season accounts for a relatively low 
percentage of annual sales volume. Moreover, sales 
continued to be constrained by very low inventory levels.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts covering much of the 
Third District reported that slow, steady incremental 
growth was supporting leasing (and pre-leasing) activity, 
falling vacancy rates, rising rents, and new construction. 
Industrial/warehouse space is in greatest demand 
throughout the District. The market for office space is 
tightest in Philadelphia’s central business district, while 
most suburban office markets are still strengthening. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity grew slightly on balance across the Fourth District since our last report. Labor markets continue to 
show signs of tightening. Upward pressure on selling prices increased. Retailers reported disappointing same-store 
sales through the early part of the holiday shopping season, while motor vehicle unit sales increased. Production at 
manufacturing plants was stable. The housing market improved, with higher unit sales and higher prices. Commercial 
builders reported some pull back in inquiries and backlogs. Reports indicated a healthy increase in upstream shale gas 
activity. Coal production rose. Freight volume expanded over the period, but volume was flat compared to that of the 
same time period a year ago. 
Employment and Wages  
Payrolls were little changed on balance since our last 
report. Job gains in banking were offset by losses in 
construction and freight hauling. Staffing firms reported a 
slight improvement in the number of job openings and 
placements; healthcare professionals were in highest 
demand. Job losses in manufacturing since late summer 
have been stemmed. While not creating new positions, 
manufacturers are replacing employees who leave vol-
untarily. Homebuilders and commercial contractors 
reported temporary seasonal layoffs. The construction 
industry continues to experience some wage pressure, 
especially from high-skilled workers. Staffing levels at 
banks increased on net. Many bankers noted wage 
pressure at the entry level and for high-skilled jobs, citing 
competition from within and outside their industry.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on selling prices increased over the 
period. Manufacturers reported widespread increases in 
finished goods prices in response to rising raw-material 
costs, primarily for steel. Increasing wellhead prices for 
natural gas were attributed to the cold weather and stor-
age withdrawals. Coal prices rose in response to draw-
downs of domestic power plant coal inventories, the 
strengthening gas prices, and a firming in export prices 
that was supported by continued tightness in internation-
al coal supplies. Shortages of homebuilding materials 
have been driving up prices, especially for concrete, 
drywall, and framing lumber. Commercial building con-
tractors saw rising prices for structural steel and rebar. A 
few retail chains reported reassessing their shelf prices 
because of intensifying price competition. New motor 
vehicle average transaction prices have risen about 1 
percent in the past year, but that number hides distinct 
trends for cars and light trucks. Car prices have declined 
because of rising dealer and OEM incentives. In con-
trast, light truck prices increased because of larger stick-
er price increases and lower incentives. Upward pres-
sure on freight hauling rates is expected during 2017 
because implementing regulations associated with the 
new electronic logging requirements may lead to a tem-
porary reduction in freight capacity.  
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported disappointing same-store sales 
through the early part of the holiday shopping season. 
The unusually warm weather was cited as driving down 
purchases of cold-weather items. An apparel chain noted 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
significant price competition from several competitors 
who are in the process of liquidating. Another chain 
reported that although foot traffic has increased, price 
declines for select product lines has resulted in flat sales 
in those lines. Going forward, traditional retailers expect 
little change in sales because of intensifying price com-
petition, especially from Internet sellers. Several contacts 
reported cutting capital budgets because of weakening 
sales. However, investment in e-commerce remains 
strong. Year-to-date unit sales through November of new 
motor vehicles declined 1 percent when compared to the 
year-earlier period. Light trucks continue to dominate 
transactions. Used motor vehicle transactions have 
increased about 3 percent.  
Manufacturing 
Factory output was little changed over the period, though 
several contacts cited a seasonal downturn in new or-
ders. Activity for suppliers to the motor vehicle and con-
struction industries remains elevated. Factors tempering 
output growth for other manufacturing industries include 
a general malaise in the industrial products market and 
weakness in the energy sector. Year-to-date production 
through November at District auto assembly plants fell 5 
percent when compared to that of the same time period 
during 2015. Car inventories remain significantly higher 
than those for light trucks. Steel producers reported 
rising volumes, a situation which they attributed to lower 
imports. Capital spending increased slightly over the 
period, but a large share of the monies was allocated for 
maintenance projects. Spending on new equipment and 
product development fell. Post-election confidence has 
buoyed the outlook of many contacts; however, it re-
mains uncertain how potential changes in the regulatory 
environment ultimately will affect capital investment. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Year-to-date unit sales through November of new and 
existing single-family homes increased 5 percent com-
pared to those of a year earlier. The average sales price 
rose 4.5 percent. Homebuilders are concerned about 
rising interest rates and the affect they will have on con-
sumers’ willingness to purchase new homes. First-time- 
buyer and first-move-up contracts moved higher, where-
as sales of high-end homes slowed. Year-to-date esti-
mates of single-family construction starts were much 
higher in Ohio and Kentucky, but lower in Pennsylvania, 
compared to a year earlier. 
Although overall activity remains elevated, nonresidential 
contractors reported a slowing in the number of inquiries 
and a decline in backlogs, a situation which they attribut-
ed to seasonal factors and uncertainty leading up to the 
presidential election. General contractors are expecting 
to see an increase in spending on infrastructure projects 
and for warehousing and distribution centers. Many 
general contractors reported raising billing rates to cover 
higher material costs, especially for steel.  
Banking 
Bankers reported that lending pipelines are relatively 
strong, but there is little organic growth. Several contacts 
reported seasonal slowing in select product lines, espe-
cially on the retail side. The outlook is more positive 
since the presidential election because some clients are 
expecting regulatory relief. One banker noted the first 
round of federal funds rate increases is unlikely to be 
passed through to savers. However, future increases will 
likely result in higher interest rates paid on savings ac-
counts. Credit quality remains strong, and little change 
was reported in loan-application standards. On the com-
mercial side, the strongest demand was for CRE loans. 
Reports from retail banking indicated that the highest 
demand was for auto loans and home equity products. 
Core deposit balances continued to increase.   
Energy 
Reports showed a healthy increase in the number of 
permits issued and the number of drilling rigs operating 
in the Marcellus and Utica Shales during the past couple 
of months. Nonetheless, upstream activity is below lev-
els seen two years ago. Natural gas output remains at 
historic highs. Coal production continued to move higher 
as customers respond to their low inventories and im-
proving market conditions for their products. 
Freight Transportation 
Freight volume expanded over the period on balance 
and was attributed to a slowly improving economy. How-
ever, volume was flat compared to that of the same time 
period a year ago and was characterized as sluggish. As 
a result, some carriers reduced staffing through attrition. 
Freight shipping rates were relatively stable, other than 
select increases in the fuel surcharge. Capital spending 
was primarily for new equipment. ■ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Fifth District economic activity grew at a moderately faster pace since the previous Beige Book report. Reports were 
strongly upbeat in early December, while assessments reported later in the month and in the surveys were more re-
strained. Demand for labor increased at a moderate pace, and reports of wage pressures were more common than 
earlier. Price changes were generally mild, except at retail and services firms where prices received rose at a slightly 
faster pace. The manufacturing sector strengthened and producers indicated moderate growth in new orders. Retail 
sales rose briskly, while tourism at winter resorts strengthened to seasonal levels. Residential real estate activity was 
little changed at seasonal levels. Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately and sales increased modestly. Resi-
dential and commercial loan demand was flat to slightly stronger in the weeks since the previous report. Revenue 
growth at non-financial services firms remained modest. Indicators for agricultural and natural resource production were 
mixed. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand increased at a moderate pace since the 
previous Beige Book. District businesses reported mod-
est increases in wages, with more contacts reporting 
increased wage pressures. The supply of well-qualified 
workers, especially in the skilled trades, continued to be 
a problem. A Virginia recruiter reported slightly stronger 
demand for employees in customer service, health care, 
legal, and government positions. Staffing firms reported 
that the volume of worker conversion from temporary to 
permanent remained at normal levels. A contact in 
Charleston, South Carolina said companies there were 
doing more direct hiring in recent weeks. Also a staffing 
firm in West Virginia reported increased placement of 
temporary workers due to high demand from manufac-
turers, especially in the automotive sector.  
Prices  
Manufacturers reported that average input prices rose 
modestly in recent weeks, with the exception of copper 
and stainless steel, which advanced more rapidly. Aver-
age manufacturing output prices increased only slightly. 
Services and retail prices continued to rise moderately 
and at a slightly faster pace than reported in our previous 
Beige Book. Cotton prices were unchanged while peanut 
and corn prices remained low. Natural gas prices rose 
modestly in recent weeks, and Northern and Central 
Appalachian coal prices edged slightly higher. 
Manufacturing 
More manufacturers reported a rise in shipments and 
growth in backlogs since the previous report, as well as 
moderate growth in new orders. In addition, increased 
capacity utilization was more widespread. Producers of 
paper products, batteries, and office furniture reported 
stronger overall business conditions. Manufacturing 
executives expected further strengthening during the 
next six months.  
Ports and Transportation 
The volume of container traffic rose moderately at two of 
the District’s ports since the previous report. At another 
port, container traffic increased by double digits every 
month in the fourth quarter, in part because of calls from 
larger, post-Panamax vessels. Imports of autos re-
mained strong at one major port in recent weeks, while 
both imports and exports of farm and construction ma-
chinery remained very weak. In addition, exports of 
autos declined. 
A couple of national trucking firms in the District reported 
that demand for dedicated freight services increased 
moderately, as businesses locked in services to ensure 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
their freight needs will be met when an electronic log 
mandate becomes effective in late 2017. 
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales rose briskly in recent weeks, with strong 
shopper traffic and big-ticket sales. A sporting goods 
store manager said his sales to large-scale customers, 
such as schools, were particularly strong. A wholesaler 
of construction equipment and a chain store in the home 
and garden business also reported that sales increased.  
Contacts generally indicated that tourist activity strength-
ened to normal seasonal levels at winter resorts. In 
addition, a source on the outer banks of North Carolina 
said tourist stays were above year-ago levels. However, 
an hotelier in western North Carolina reported a softer 
market in his area.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales were flat since the previous 
report, with typical low levels of buyer traffic for the win-
ter months. Inventories remained low, while days on the 
market were generally unchanged. However, a contact in 
Roanoke, Virginia stated that demand for more expen-
sive homes improved while noting that smaller down 
payment requirements contributed to increased sales of 
modestly priced homes, particularly for first-time home 
buyers. Residential builders reported that home starts 
and closings were steady at modest levels, while one 
contact said that seasoned builders finished another 
good year. However, many sources continued to report a 
lack of lots and limited new home inventories.  
On balance, commercial real estate leasing rose moder-
ately in recent weeks. Rental rates rose moderately in 
both retail and industrial markets. The retail sector re-
mained the most active in terms of leasing, with contin-
ued demand for fast casual restaurants and grocery 
stores. Real estate agents reported strong industrial 
leasing, with more e-commerce tenants looking for large 
facilities. Office leasing was generally unchanged at low 
levels, although some contacts reported tightening in the 
Class A market. Commercial real estate sales increased 
modestly for retail, industrial, and multifamily properties, 
with slightly improved sales prices. Commercial con-
struction remained steady at modest levels, except in 
Washington, D.C., Charlotte, and Charleston, South 
Carolina, where multi-family construction was reported to 
be stronger.    
 
 
Banking and Finance 
Loan demand was reported as stable or increasing 
slightly in recent weeks. On the residential mortgage 
side, demand for new originations was unchanged while 
demand for refinancing rose modestly. A banker in West 
Virginia attributed the rise in refinance demand to antici-
pated interest rate increases. Commercial loan demand 
was described as stable overall, with reports of strength 
in D.C., while West Virginia’s coal regions continued to 
be depressed. Business lending was unchanged; howev-
er lenders’ outlooks improved. One banker said there 
was an increase in optimism although most business 
owners were in a ‘wait and see mode.’ Reports on core 
deposit growth were mixed. A Virginia banker reported 
strong growth in core deposits while a West Virginia 
banker reported a slight decline. Credit standards were 
unchanged or slightly tighter while credit quality was 
stable. In West Virginia, however, quality declined slight-
ly and past-due payments rose marginally.  
Non-Financial Services 
Most services firms reported that revenue growth re-
mained modest since the previous report. However, legal 
and accounting services providers indicated that reve-
nues rose more quickly.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Reports on agricultural activity in recent weeks were 
mixed. A South Carolina farmer indicated that improved 
weather conditions after Hurricane Matthew allowed 
crops to dry out enough to be harvested; yields, howev-
er, were down markedly from historical averages. A 
Maryland contact said that the fall harvest finished early, 
which allowed grain farmers to get moderately better 
prices than growers in the Midwest. Dairy farm consoli-
dation continued and milk production was stable due to 
technology enhancements. Agriculture investments rose 
slightly for light equipment while large equipment sales 
remained weak.  
Coal production declined slightly in the southern part of 
West Virginia but rose in the northern part. Natural gas 
extraction rose modestly in recent weeks. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity expanded at a modest pace since the previous report. 
The outlook among most contacts for first half of 2017 remains optimistic. Businesses continued to report a tightening 
labor market and steady wage growth. Non-labor input costs remained relatively unchanged since the previous report. 
District merchants and automobile dealers cited an increase in sales. Tourism reports were mixed. Residential real 
estate contacts indicated that December new home sales were flat to slightly up from a year earlier and that existing 
home sales were mixed. Home prices increased modestly since the last report. Commercial real estate contacts contin-
ued to indicate improving demand. Manufacturers noted an increase in new orders and production. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts reported continued tightening in the labor mar-
ket since the previous report. Firms and staffing agen-
cies had difficulty filling positions for certain professional 
jobs, craft labor jobs, and low-skill jobs. For professional 
positions in particular, employers noted that they were 
being more selective than they were prior to the reces-
sion. Manufacturers reported moderate increases in 
payroll levels, while retailers encountered the typical 
seasonal uptick in payrolls. In order to fill vacancies for 
low-skill positions, a number of firms and staffing agen-
cies reported that they had reduced job qualification 
requirements. Businesses continued to report investing 
in technology to automate certain positions as a way to 
address the challenges of finding workers. Firms contin-
ued to engage in partnerships with community colleges 
and workforce development organizations to develop 
customized training programs, apprenticeship programs, 
and internship opportunities. Most contacts reported 
relatively stable wage growth, despite continued upward 
pressure for select high-skill or high-demand positions.   
Prices  
Contacts reported little change in input costs and prices. 
Exceptions were reports from purchasing managers of 
continued increases in commodity prices, downward 
pricing pressure in trucking and maritime shipping due to 
excess capacity, and lower refined gasoline and diesel 
prices due to excess supply. According to the Atlanta 
Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey, year-over-
year unit costs were up 1.7 percent in December. Survey 
respondents indicated they expect unit costs to rise 2.1 
percent over the following twelve months.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Most District retail contacts reported that sales levels 
rose modestly since the last report. Early reports from 
merchants for holiday sales indicated that levels ap-
peared to have been slightly above expectations. Auto-
mobile dealers noted that incentives, such as cash bo-
nuses and discounts, boosted overall vehicle sales in 
November.   
Reports from tourism and hospitality contacts across the 
District continued to be mixed. Contacts in Georgia re-
ported continued growth in business, leisure, and group 
travel; while contacts in Florida reported a slight de-
crease in tourism activity since the last report. The out-
look among most contacts for the first quarter of the year 
remains optimistic.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Overall, reports from District residential real estate con-
tacts continued to note slow but steady growth in De-
cember. The majority of builders noted that construction 
activity was up from the year-ago level. Many builders 
indicated that home sales were flat to slightly up relative 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
to the year-earlier level, while brokers indicated home 
sales were mixed over the same period. Most builders 
and brokers noted that buyer traffic was equal to or 
higher than the previous year’s level. Brokers reported 
that inventory levels were mixed relative to the year-
earlier level, while most builder reports indicated that 
inventory levels were flat or rising. Builders and brokers 
continued to note modest gains in home prices in De-
cember. Home sales expectations improved a bit since 
the previous report, with many brokers and builders 
anticipating sales to remain flat or increase slightly over 
the next three months relative to the year-earlier level. 
Most builders anticipate construction activity will hold 
steady at the current pace or increase slightly over the 
next three months.  
Most commercial real estate contacts noted improve-
ments in demand resulting in rent growth and increased 
absorption, but continued to caution that the rate of im-
provement varied by metropolitan area, submarket, and 
property type. The majority of commercial contractors 
indicated that the pace of nonresidential construction 
activity had increased from one year ago, with many 
reporting backlogs greater than one year. Reports on the 
pace of multifamily construction were mixed, with roughly 
half indicating that the pace had increased from the year-
earlier level and the rest suggesting that the pace had 
leveled off or slowed. Looking forward, most District 
commercial real estate contacts expect the pace of non-
residential construction activity to increase slightly over 
the next quarter while many anticipate the pace of multi-
family construction to continue to level off in the coming 
quarters.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts reported that overall business 
activity increased since the last report. Purchasing man-
agers indicated that new orders  increased and produc-
tion activity continued to rise at a firm pace. Supplier 
delivery times were reported to be slightly longer, while 
inventory levels of finished goods rose notably compared 
to the previous report. Expectations for future production 
remained fairly consistent with the previous report, with 
almost half of firms anticipating an increase in production 
levels over the next six months.  
Transportation 
District transportation contacts reported mixed levels of 
activity. Ports cited substantial growth in containerized 
cargo, which was attributed to a strengthening in export 
demand and a busy peak season. Year-over-year total 
rail traffic fell further since the last report due to signifi-
cant declines in the shipments of petroleum and petrole-
um products, metallic ores, coal, and farm products. 
Intermodal traffic was also down. Trucking companies 
reported a continued slowdown in truckload freight; 
however, holiday e-commerce shipment volumes far 
exceeded expectations, placing constraints on capacity 
and negatively impacting on-time delivery rates. The 
majority of transportation contacts forecast higher levels 
of activity over the next year.  
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers. However, some small businesses continued to 
have difficulty obtaining credit.  
Energy  
Contacts continued to report weak demand and an over-
supply in the oil and gas sectors. Contacts among a 
growing global liquefied natural gas export market along 
the Gulf Coast noted that they are positioned to meet 
demand and capacity. Utility industry contacts noted that 
investment in windfarm projects continued to expand, 
and that changing customer behaviors and energy effi-
ciency improvements in end-use technologies continued 
to challenge growth in electricity demand.   
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. By 
the end of November, much of the District was catego-
rized as experiencing severe to exceptional drought 
conditions. December rains brought some relief, alt-
hough parts of Alabama and Georgia remained classified 
in severe or extreme drought categories and dry condi-
tions expanded through most of Florida. The USDA 
again designated many counties in the District as natural 
disaster areas due to damages and losses attributed to 
the drought. Florida’s December orange forecast was 
unchanged from November, remaining below last sea-
son’s production. On a year-over-year basis, prices paid 
to farmers in November were up for cotton, soybeans, 
and broilers, but down for corn, rice, beef, and eggs. In 
light of poor pasture conditions caused by the drought, 
livestock producers using corn for feed benefited from 
low corn prices. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District continued at a modest pace in late November and December, though 
contacts expected it to move up to a moderate pace over the next six to twelve months. While manufacturing production 
grew at a robust rate and business spending grew at a moderate rate, consumer spending increased modestly and 
construction and real estate activity edged up. Financial conditions improved some, prices increased modestly, and farm 
incomes were little changed. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth slowed to a modest rate over the 
reporting period, though contacts expected growth to 
pick up to a moderate rate over the next six to twelve 
months. Contacts continued to indicate that the labor 
market is tight and that they are experiencing more 
difficulty filling positions at all skill levels. One manufac-
turing contact reported such difficulty finding high-skilled 
workers that they had traded in expensive, sophisticated 
machinery for cheaper, less sophisticated equipment 
that was easier to operate. A staffing firm reported no 
change in billable hours and ongoing difficulty filling 
orders at the wages employers were willing to pay. That 
said, overall, wage growth picked up to a moderate 
pace. Some contacts reported larger wage increases for 
high-skilled occupations, while a number of contacts 
indicated that they raised wages equally for all employ-
ees. Many contacts also reported rising healthcare costs. 
Prices  
Prices again rose modestly in late November and De-
cember. Retail prices increased only slightly. Contacts 
reported rallies in energy and metals prices and that 
these had led to higher steel prices. Higher transporta-
tion costs continued to weigh on agricultural returns, 
particularly for milk producers. 
Consumer Spending 
Growth in consumer spending picked up to a modest 
pace over the reporting period, and most contacts ex-
pected that pace to continue in 2017. Contacts reported 
stronger sales in the food and beverage, general mer-
chandise, hardware, and personal services sectors. 
Sales of new light vehicles strengthened further, support-
ed in part by even more aggressive incentives. Many 
dealers reported record sales for the calendar year and 
expected similar sales levels in 2017. Used light vehicles 
sales increased as well, as the high number of new 
vehicles coming off lease helped push down prices. 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending remained at a moderate 
pace overall in late November and December. Retailers 
largely indicated that inventories were at comfortable 
levels, though many auto dealers reported that invento-
ries were uncomfortably high in spite of strong sales. 
Manufacturing inventories were generally at desired 
levels, though steel service center inventories were 
below historical norms. Current capital expenditures 
grew at a moderate pace and contacts expected that 
pace to continue over the next six to twelve months. 
Outlays were primarily for replacing industrial and IT 
equipment. Shipping volumes increased slightly. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity edged up over the 
reporting period. Residential construction grew slightly 
across home types and locations. Home sales and pric-
es increased slightly overall, though growth varied by 
price range: demand for homes under $250,000 grew 
strongly, while demand for homes between $250,000 
and $500,000 was flat, and demand for homes over 
$500,000 was up slightly. Nonresidential construction 
increased modestly on balance. While one contact re-
ported having the largest backlog of projects in years, 
another reported that demand for more space from auto-
motive suppliers had eased. Commercial real estate 
activity increased slightly in both the for-sale and for-
lease segments. Commercial rents and availability of 
sublease space were little changed, and commercial 
vacancy rates decreased slightly. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production picked up to a ro-
bust pace in late November and December. Growth 
continued to be strong in autos and aerospace (though it 
slowed a bit in autos) and was moderate overall among 
other industries. Demand for steel increased some, but 
remained modest. Contacts expected production of steel 
to pick up in 2017, driven partly by a projected recovery 
in oil and gas demand. Heavy machinery manufacturers 
reported growth in sales, reflecting both strengthening 
end user demand and a smaller-than-expected cutback 
in dealers’ inventories. A number of speciality metals 
manufacturers indicated that order book growth was 
stronger than expected at the end of the year. Manufac-
turers of construction materials again reported slow, but 
steady, increases in shipments, in line with the modest 
pace of improvement in construction. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved on balance over the re-
porting period. Financial market participants reported 
broad-based growth in equity prices and low volatility. 
Loan demand from middle-market businesses increased 
slightly overall, with improvements spread widely across 
sectors. Credit quality and standards were little changed, 
though one contact reported that standards were loosen-
ing because of competitive pressure. Consumer loan 
demand was little changed. Residential mortgage activity 
increased slightly, and with rising rates, there was a shift 
in the mix from refinancing to new originations. Contacts 
reported a slight decline in auto loan demand and that 
auto loan quality was unchanged.   
Agriculture 
Farm incomes were little changed in late November and 
December. Corn prices moved higher and sales picked 
up some, but inventories remained high following the 
record harvest. Soybean sales were up moderately while 
soybean exports remained strong. Contacts reported 
modest declines in input costs, as fertilizer and seed 
prices fell. Farmland rents were also somewhat lower, 
but had not fallen as much as land values. A rally in 
cattle prices, as well as increases in dairy, egg, and hog 
prices, provided some relief for stressed livestock opera-
tions. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Information from contacts suggests that economic conditions have continued to expand at a modest pace since our 
previous report. Reports of planned activity in the manufacturing and nonfinancial services sectors were generally posi-
tive. Labor market conditions remain tight, with moderate growth in both employment and wages. Reports indicate that 
consumer spending growth was generally unchanged, but with expectations of improvement in the first part of this year. 
Residential real estate conditions were somewhat mixed, while commercial real estate activity remained robust. District 
bankers reported that loan demand remained modest, with growth among most loan types. 
Employment and Wages  
Anecdotal evidence suggests moderate increases in 
employment and wages since our previous report. Con-
tacts described the year-end increases in employment 
as in line with growth in previous years. Reports indicat-
ed that manufacturing employment increased moderately 
in Missouri and modestly in Arkansas. Contacts in Louis-
ville expressed difficulties finding seasonal workers 
because of the high demand for seasonal employment 
combined with a tight labor market, leading some to 
increase wages temporarily to attract employees. Con-
tacts in Little Rock reported that wages for skilled work-
ers continue to steadily increase. In addition, the number 
of unemployed workers per advertised vacancy fell 
modestly throughout the District in December.  
Prices  
Price pressures in the District remained modest. In gen-
eral, business contacts did not report many changes in 
prices charged to customers. Low commodity prices 
continue to put pressure on profit margins in sectors 
dependent on the agricultural sector. For example, agri-
cultural equipment dealers outside of Memphis reported 
they have reduced prices on late-model used trade-ins to 
fuel sales. A contact in Arkansas reported there has 
been no shale drilling activity recently due to large inven-
tories and the low price of oil. Another contact in Little 
Rock cited concerns that the strengthening of the U.S. 
dollar is putting downward pressure on grain prices. 
However, since the previous report, cash prices for coal 
and feed corn both increased moderately, those for corn 
meal, soybeans, and sorghum increased slightly, those 
for rice declined slightly. Across the District, home prices 
continued to increase moderately. A contact in the Mem-
phis area also reported higher prices in industrial and 
retail properties. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers and auto dealers indicate 
consumer spending growth in the District was generally 
unchanged. Contacts described the increase in year-end 
sales as in line with typical seasonal fluctuations. Arkan-
sas taxable sales picked up in December after a sluggish 
November. The purchasing sentiment of District house-
holds continued to indicate that the next few months 
should be a good time to buy major household items. 
Multiple business contacts cited relatively low gas prices 
compared with the national average as a source of opti-
mism. Furthermore, nearly half of surveyed auto dealers 
expect year-over-year increases in sales in the first 
quarter of 2017, and the majority anticipates increases in 
inventory over the same period. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report. Many companies reported capital ex-
penditure and facility expansion plans in the District, 
including several manufacturers of food products and 
wood products. In contrast, a large manufacturer of 
transportation equipment announced plans to close a 
large facility and relocate operations outside of the Dis-
trict. Manufacturers were generally optimistic and expect 
new orders and production to increase over the first 
quarter. Contacts expressed concern about the strong 
dollar, the possibility of trade restrictions, and global 
economic weakness. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports of plans in the District’s service sectors have 
been positive since the previous report. In particular, 
several firms that provide healthcare, retail, and utilities 
services announced plans to build or expand facilities 
and hire new employees. Reports from information ser-
vices, leisure and hospitality, and professional and busi-
ness services were mixed, with some expansion but also 
several facility closings and layoffs. Reports from the 
transportation sector were positive. A Little Rock contact 
noted that trucking activity has outperformed seasonality 
in the past 5 or 6 weeks.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity was mixed across the 
District, with little overall change in home sales from the 
previous reporting period, while inventory remained tight. 
Residential construction activity was also roughly un-
changed since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted 
building permits for November were flat, on average, 
across District metropolitan areas. Still, permit activity 
was higher than a year ago. Some local homebuilders 
indicated concerns over rising mortgage rates.  
Commercial real estate activity increased at a moderate 
pace. Multifamily and industrial demand continued to 
strengthen. Commercial construction activity improved 
moderately. The amount of new non-residential space 
started in November was significantly lower than a year 
ago in the largest metro areas in the District. However, a 
number of new projects were announced or approved 
across the District. St. Louis in particular saw plans 
established or greenlighted for a multitude of new multi-
family and office buildings. A local contact also noted 
that field work has been steadily increasing despite the 
slowdown in construction starts. 
Banking and Finance 
Credit market conditions within the District improved at a 
moderate pace since the previous reporting period. 
According to a survey of 85 small- and mid-sized District 
banks, overall lending activity experienced moderate 
growth across all lending categories with some signs of a 
slight tapering. Increases in real estate lending made the 
largest contributions to aggregate loan growth since the 
previous reporting period. Over the same time frame, 
loans to individuals expanded at the highest rate for any 
singular loan category. Bankers reported demand for 
commercial real estate loans was generally unchanged 
while commercial and industrial loan portfolios grew at a 
moderate pace. Some banks have reported increases in 
non-performing loans in their agricultural loan portfolios, 
which they attribute to low commodity prices throughout 
last year.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
As of late November, 95 percent of the District’s planned 
winter wheat had been planted, which is a roughly 1-
percentage-point improvement over last year. Faster 
planting occurred partly because District farmers 
planned to plant 13 percent fewer acres than they did for 
the prior crop year. Reports suggest that low snow accu-
mulation, which serves as insulation for winter wheat, 
and periods of extremely cold temperatures may reduce 
yields.  
District seasonally adjusted coal production dropped 3 
percent from November to December, while year-to-date 
production through December was 18 percent below last 
year’s level. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment was mixed, with notable hiring and 
layoff events, but an optimistic outlook overall among different sources. Wage pressure was moderate, while price pres-
sure was modest overall. The District economy showed growth in manufacturing, real estate, commercial construction, 
energy, and tourism. But consumer spending dropped, residential construction slowed, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment was mixed since the last report, but labor 
markets continued to be tight, and the 2017 hiring 
outlook was positive. Initial unemployment claims in the 
five-week period ending in mid-December were 
unchanged in Minnesota and Montana relative to a year 
earlier, but were higher in the Dakotas. A retail 
distribution center in Minnesota announced plans to hire 
1,000 full-time employees in the coming year, and 
energy companies were reportedly hiring again in the oil 
fields of western North Dakota. Results from the 
Minneapolis Fed’s annual survey of manufacturers, 
conducted in November and December, showed that 
hiring activity was flat in 2016, though the outlook was 
positive as one-third of respondents planned to increase 
employment in the coming year. A Montana staffing 
agency reported solid hiring expectations among clients. 
“There is a level of optimism I haven’t seen in a long 
time,” said a source there. A survey of employers by a 
multistate staffing firm found a positive, but somewhat 
softer hiring outlook for the first quarter of 2017 in the 
District compared with earlier surveys. In Minnesota 
more than a half-dozen layoff events occurred, or were 
announced, involving between 60 and several hundred 
workers, including a transportation company, health care 
provider, boat manufacturer, medical device firm, and 
private higher education firm. Eight department store 
closures were also announced.  
Wage pressure was moderate since the last report. The 
survey of manufacturers found that 2016 wages and 
benefits rose by an average of 2.5 percent to 3 percent, 
with slightly smaller increases expected in the coming 
year. A smaller ad hoc survey of professional services 
firms produced roughly similar results, though the 
outlook for 2017 wages was somewhat higher. A 
Minneapolis-St. Paul staffing contact said wages 
“increased slightly” during the fourth quarter as 
employers competed for labor, especially in the retail 
sector. A North Dakota source said that although 
unemployment was still very low, wage pressure 
“appeared to have leveled off” with slightly slower 
demand there for labor.   
Prices  
Price pressure was modest since the last report. The 
majority of respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s 
manufacturing survey reported that prices were 
unchanged over the past year, but one-third expected to 
increase their prices in 2017. One manufacturer noted 
that steel prices have been flat for two years, but cement 
prices have increased around 15 percent. Home heating 
costs were expected to be as much as 30 percent higher 
this winter than last year, due to a combination of colder 
weather and higher fuel prices. Most prices received by 
farmers decreased in November from a year earlier, with 
the exception of chickens and soybeans.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending across the District was down 
modestly since the last report. A mall manager in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul reported a “very odd” holiday 
season for consumer spending in recent months; overall 
spending was down roughly 2 percent to 3 percent. 
Contributing factors included unfavorable weather, 
holiday timing that corresponded with a weekend, and 
increased online shopping. Weather was warm in 
November, “so there was no Christmas feel in the air” 
and weather in December was “too cold to encourage 
shopping.” Conditions were similar in Fargo, N.D., where 
consumer spending was down 4 percent to 5 percent, 
according to a mall manager there. “Cold weather and 
storms deterred many shoppers, especially because 40 
percent of our mall shoppers live outside of the city 
limits.”  Clothing retailers, in particular, have seen a drop 
in sales; one national clothing retailer has closed five 
stores in the Minneapolis-St. Paul region. Automotive 
sales were modest since the last report. A car dealership 
in Devils Lake, N.D., reported that new car sales were 
down slightly, but used-car sales made up for the small 
loss. “We’re all pretty optimistic for 2017; 2016 ended up 
doing pretty well.”  
Tourism 
Tourism conditions were up moderately since the 
previous report. Snowy weather had a positive impact on 
winter tourism activity. Ski lodges and restaurants in 
Montana, Minnesota, and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula 
reported ideal conditions for winter activity, including low 
fuel prices for travelers. Since the last report, hotel 
occupancy rates have flattened as reported by owners in 
Billings, Mont., and Minneapolis-St. Paul. A tourism 
official in northern Wisconsin reported that December 
businesses experienced strong demand. A tourism 
official in the Upper Peninsula said, “We are having a 
terrific start to the new year; looks like we will have the 
best winter conditions that we’ve had in five years.”  
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction activity was mixed since the last report. 
Projects out for bid through mid-December were at 
similar levels to a year earlier, according to an industry 
database. Industrial and retail space currently under 
construction in Minneapolis-St. Paul was higher than a 
year ago, while office space construction was 
significantly lower. Multifamily permits in November-
December rose considerably over a year earlier in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul and Rochester, Minn., along with 
Rapid City and Sioux Falls, S.D. Activity in highway and 
other heavy construction sectors was slower. A 
construction supply contact in Minnesota said firms 
working on infrastructure projects statewide “are feeling 
the pinch” because of delayed public funding. A Montana 
source said the building sector there “has been fairly 
robust,” but the highway sector has slowed significantly 
because of lower-than-expected state fuel tax 
collections. This has curtailed maintenance projects and 
postponed project lettings. Residential construction 
slowed, as total single-family permits fell in November-
December compared with a year earlier in Billings, 
Fargo, Bismarck, N.D., Minneapolis-St. Paul, and 
Rochester. Only Sioux Falls saw a slight uptick over this 
period. 
Real estate activity was moderate to strong since the last 
report. Sales of office, industrial, and apartment 
properties in Minneapolis-St. Paul were strong, though 
office vacancy rates there have ticked higher as several 
major tenants vacated space for new, build-to-suit 
space. Home sales in November were higher relative to 
a year earlier, including double-digit increases in 18 
northern Wisconsin counties, the Flathead Valley region 
in Montana, and across Minnesota.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing increased modestly since the 
previous report. An index of manufacturing conditions 
produced by Creighton University indicated increased 
activity in December in Minnesota and the Dakotas. 
Although respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s annual 
manufacturing survey indicated that 2016 demand and 
production was flat to slightly down, respondents 
expected orders, production, investment, productivity, 
and profits to increase in the coming year. A supplier of 
machinery used in producing heavy equipment for 
forestry and other uses indicated recent demand was up 
dramatically.    
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak, with 
bountiful harvests offset by low commodity prices. Some 
District logging operations were reducing production in 
response to low timber prices. Activity in the energy 
sector was up slightly. Regulators approved an 
environmental permit for a large wind power 
development in South Dakota. District oil and gas drilling 
as of late-December was roughly unchanged from a 
month earlier; however, reports indicated that multiple 
firms were hiring oilfield service crews. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased modestly in late November and December, and most sectors were 
optimistic about growth in the next few months. Consumer spending increased with retail, auto and tourism contacts 
reporting stronger sales than the previous survey period. Manufacturing activity expanded moderately due to stronger 
activity in both the durable and nondurable goods sectors. Contacts in transportation, professional, and high-tech firms 
reported increased sales, but firms in the wholesale trade sector noted a continued moderate decline in activity. District 
real estate conditions were modestly weaker as residential real estate activity declined and commercial real estate 
activity remained flat. Energy activity across the District experienced moderate growth, and expectations remained 
positive. District farm income remained subdued as low crop and livestock prices persisted. Employment increased 
slightly since the previous survey period, and contacts reported modest wage growth. Input prices were up slightly in 
most sectors, and selling prices were mixed. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment and employee hours rose slightly since the 
previous survey period. Contacts in the transportation, 
professional and high-tech, real estate, education and 
manufacturing sectors noted increased employment 
levels in late November and December, while employ-
ment declined in the wholesale trade sector. Additionally, 
employment in the retail and auto sectors was below 
year-ago levels, but was flat in the restaurant sector. 
Employment in the energy sector increased, although 
remained below year-ago levels. Contacts across all 
sectors expected stable-to-increasing employment levels 
over the next six months. Average employee hours 
worked increased slightly in the service and manufactur-
ing sectors. Respondents noted a shortage of commer-
cial drivers, skilled technicians, and service workers. 
Contacts in most sectors continued to report modest 
wage growth, and anticipated moderate wage growth in 
the months ahead.  
Prices  
Input prices were up slightly in most sectors compared to 
the previous survey period, while selling prices were 
mixed. In the retail sector, input prices edged up, while 
selling prices fell modestly. Both input and selling prices 
declined in the restaurant industry, but were expected to 
increase in the coming months. Respondents in the 
transportation sector reported slightly higher input prices, 
but selling prices held steady after contracting during the 
prior survey period. Prices in the construction sector 
rose, with additional moderate increases expected in the 
coming months. Manufacturers reported a modest rise in 
finished goods prices after falling in the previous survey, 
while raw material costs edged up. Manufacturers ex-
pected a slight increase in both finished goods and raw 
materials prices over the next few months. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly in late Novem-
ber and December, and was expected to increase mod-
erately in the next six months. Retail sales rose moder-
ately since the previous survey and were considerably 
above year-ago levels. Winter and holiday items sold 
particularly well, while sales of luxury products were 
sluggish. Retailers anticipated sales to rise in the next 
few months, and inventory levels were expected to in-
crease slightly. Auto sales rebounded modestly over the 
survey period, but remained below year-ago levels. 
However, dealer contacts expected a strong pickup in 
sales during the months ahead. Auto inventories in-
creased and were expected to rise slightly in the coming 
months. Restaurant sales fell modestly and were slightly 
below year-ago levels. Respondents in the restaurant 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
sector expected a moderate increase in activity heading 
forward. District tourism activity remained above year-
ago levels, and a strong increase in activity was ex-
pected moving into the winter months.   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
District manufacturing activity expanded moderately 
since the previous survey period, while the pace of other 
business activity varied. Manufacturers reported consid-
erable improvement in both durable and nondurable 
goods production, particularly in metals, machinery, and 
food products. Production, shipments, and new orders 
grew at their fastest pace in over two years. Manufactur-
ers’ capital spending plans expanded moderately, and 
many contacts expressed signs of optimism heading 
forward.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
transportation firms reported moderate sales increases, 
with strong improvements expected in future months. 
Wholesale trade contacts noted a continued moderate 
decline in activity but were optimistic about future sales. 
Professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade firms re-
ported favorable capital spending plans, while transpor-
tation contacts expected capital spending to continue to 
fall. 
Real Estate and Construction  
Overall District real estate conditions were modestly 
weaker as residential real estate activity declined and 
commercial real estate activity remained flat. Residential 
sales and inventories were moderately lower than the 
previous survey period, but contacts expected sales to 
increase over the coming months as adverse seasonal 
factors abated and buyers sought to purchase homes at 
low interest rates. Home prices remained moderately 
higher in late November and December and were ex-
pected to rise further. Residential construction activity 
declined since the previous survey, with flat housing 
starts and moderately lower construction supply sales. 
Contacts anticipated residential construction activity to 
increase moderately in the months ahead. Contacts in 
the commercial real estate sector reported similar condi-
tions since the previous survey period as absorption and 
completions increased slightly, but construction under-
way, sales, vacancy rates and prices were flat. Commer-
cial real estate expectations were modestly positive.   
 
 
 
Banking 
Most bankers reported steady overall loan demand in 
late November and December including steady demand 
for commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, 
residential real estate, agricultural and consumer install-
ment loans. Loan quality was unchanged compared to a 
year ago according to most bankers. In addition, a ma-
jority of respondents expected loan quality to remain 
essentially the same over the next six months. Credit 
standards remained largely unchanged in all major loan 
categories, and a majority of respondents reported sta-
ble deposit levels.  
Energy 
District energy activity increased moderately in late 
November and December, and expectations remained 
positive. The number of active oil and gas drilling rigs 
continued to pick up modestly across the District. Oil 
prices rose moderately to reach eighteen-month highs 
after OPEC announced a lower oil production target in 
late November 2016. However, the majority of survey 
contacts expected actual production to exceed the tar-
get. Most firms projected U.S. oil production to be above 
previous forecasts due to continued expectations of 
higher oil prices. Natural gas prices were slightly higher 
due to strong seasonal demand. Local firms expected 
natural gas prices to be near current levels through 
2017, but not high enough to substantially increase 
drilling activity. 
Agriculture 
Farm income expectations weakened slightly as most 
agricultural commodity prices remained lower than a 
year ago. In the livestock sector, cattle prices declined 
from the previous year due to growing inventories, and 
hog prices also remained lower than year-ago levels. In 
the crop sector, large corn and wheat inventories kept 
prices subdued, but strong yields in some areas helped 
to offset losses from low prices. However, strong export 
demand boosted soybean prices moderately from a year 
ago. With the exception of soybeans, livestock and crop 
prices remained below the cost of production for some 
producers. District contacts reported weaker loan repay-
ment rates than the previous year as farm income and 
cash flow continued to tighten. Weaker farm income and 
credit conditions also continued to pressure farmland 
values downward modestly. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Eleventh District expanded moderately over the past six weeks. Manufacturing activity in-
creased, and demand for nonfinancial services strengthened. Retail and automobile sales rose, although there were 
some reports of weakness. Housing demand grew and commercial leasing activity expanded in most markets. Loan 
demand was stable, and the energy sector saw further improvement. Agricultural producers faced mixed conditions, as 
record grain yields pressured prices, despite firm demand. Prices, employment and wages increased. Outlooks general-
ly improved. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose, although hiring in manufactur-
ing remained weak and there were reports of layoffs in 
health care. Some energy service firms reported higher 
employment levels and a recruiter for oilfield services 
firms said they had some orders for hiring and training 
new employees for 2017. A retailer said they will likely 
layoff some employees in 2017 if soft sales persist.  
Reports of skilled labor shortages continued, particularly 
in construction. Upward wage pressures were similar to 
the last reporting period.   
Prices 
Input costs and selling prices rose during the reporting 
period. Staffing firms said pricing was flat, although one 
firm said they were renegotiating certain contracts at 
lower rates. Air fares edged up, while downward pres-
sure on rail shipping rates was noted. Oilfield service 
firms reported an increase in prices, reflecting a pickup 
in demand for their services. Oil and natural gas prices 
rose, as did retail gasoline and diesel prices. Cotton and 
grain prices remained depressed. Cattle prices rebound-
ed slightly and dairy prices generally increased but re-
mained below profitable levels for smaller producers. 
 
Manufacturing  
The manufacturing sector expanded during the reporting 
period. Output rose for durables, although continued 
weakness was seen in fabricated metals manufacturing. 
Demand for construction materials was stable, and a 
brick manufacturer said that year-over-year demand was 
flat in Dallas, but down in Houston and Austin and up in 
San Antonio. Nondurable manufacturing production was 
flat to down, but food manufacturers noted increases. 
Outlooks remained positive, although a few contacts 
cited the strong dollar as a headwind for exports. 
Gulf Coast refiners noted seasonally strong utilization 
rates, and said that large inventories and modest growth 
in demand will likely pressure margins this year. Chemi-
cal manufacturers noted a positive outlook for 2017, as 
they expect to receive better margins due to the wider 
spread between oil and natural gas prices—
domestically, chemicals are produced with natural gas 
and have a cost advantage over oil-based production in 
other parts of the world. 
Retail Sales 
Retail demand rose during the reporting period, although 
one respondent said that the holiday season was very 
competitive. Contacts cited sluggish sales in border 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
cities and energy-related areas. Still, outlooks were 
mostly optimistic. Automobile sales increased modestly 
on net, although there were reports of softness due to 
energy-related weakness.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services generally increased 
over the past six weeks at a slightly faster pace than in 
the prior period. Most staffing services firms saw a 
pickup in demand. Orders for temporary and contract 
workers remained solid, while demand for direct hires 
was mixed. Professional and technical services firms 
noted mixed activity, although revenues increased on 
net. Reports from food service firms varied as well, with 
some contacts noting continued growth, while others 
cited a decline in activity. Airlines saw an increase in 
passenger demand, which was driven by continued 
strength in domestic travel and a slight uptick in travel to 
South America. Cargo volumes were stable to up over 
the reporting period. Rail cargo increased, led by strong 
gains in grain shipments, although petroleum and coal 
shipments continued to decline. Seaport cargo volumes 
rose in large part due to strength in container traffic, 
while air shipments dipped to a slower pace than earlier 
in the year. Most services firms noted improved outlooks, 
although some expressed concern about the uncertainty 
surrounding the incoming administration. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Growth in home sales picked up during the reporting 
period, although respondents noted continued softness 
at the higher end. Several contacts attributed the in-
crease to a post-election surge and higher mortgage 
rates. There were reports of pushback from builders on 
lot pricing. Home prices were flat to up slightly, and 
some contacts said builders were beginning to focus on 
bringing more affordable product to the market.  
The DFW apartment market continued to lead other 
major Texas metros, with nearly full occupancy and 
strong rent gains, despite large deliveries. Demand in 
Houston was better than expected noted one contact, 
although it has been unable to keep up with supply, 
resulting in further declines in rents and occupancy 
rates. Rent growth slowed markedly in Austin and occu-
pancy dipped, while rents and occupancy rose in San 
Antonio. Contacts noted that financing for new multifami-
ly properties has become more difficult to obtain. 
Office leasing demand remained solid in DFW, particu-
larly for new product or recently built space. Rents ticked 
up, despite elevated construction. Leasing activity re-
mained sluggish in Houston, but office sublease invento-
ry fell after growing rapidly during the past two years. 
Industrial demand was solid in DFW, but moderated in 
Houston.  
Financial Services 
Loan demand was stable over the past six weeks, with 
most contacts reporting increases in total loan balances. 
Real estate and auto loan categories continued to per-
form well; however, demand for commercial and industri-
al loans was soft. Some contacts cited slight increases in 
interest rates on loans following the December federal 
funds rate hike. Two contacts noted a dip in non-interest 
income, driven in part by the poor performance of oil and 
gas firms and fewer mortgage refinancings because of 
higher rates. Credit quality remained solid and most 
respondents cited an uptick in deposit volumes. Outlooks 
were mostly optimistic, mainly due to elevated hopes for 
regulatory and tax relief following the presidential elec-
tions. 
Energy 
Drilling activity and demand for oilfield services improved 
modestly over the reporting period, with the increase 
largely driven by a pickup in Permian Basin activity. 
Outlooks were more optimistic than earlier in the year, 
although several contacts were skeptical about the im-
plementation of the recent OPEC production cuts. Firms 
expect oil prices to be higher a year from now, and antic-
ipate steady increases in activity over that period. 
Agriculture 
Record grain yields in 2016 have created burdensomely 
high stock levels, despite firm demand, keeping prices 
below the cost of production for most producers. Very 
strong cotton yields in West Texas led to another upward 
revision of Texas (and U.S.) cotton production, putting 
further downward pressure on prices which were already 
near breakeven or sub-profitable levels. Still, cotton 
prices are relatively better than feed grain or wheat 
prices, and contacts expect an increase in cotton acre-
age in 2017. Beef exports have increased, and low feed 
costs are helping producers’ bottom lines.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
December through early January. Overall price inflation increased modestly, while upward wage pressures strength-
ened. Sales of retail goods picked up, and growth in the consumer and business services sectors remained strong. 
Manufacturing activity changed little on balance, and conditions in the agriculture sector were largely stable. Contacts 
reported continued strong activity in residential real estate markets, while conditions in the commercial sector strength-
ened. Lending activity grew at a moderate pace. 
Employment and Wages  
On balance, wage pressures strengthened. Labor short-
ages in the technology, health-care, and financial indus-
tries boosted wages for skilled workers. Minimum wage 
legislation increased compensation for unskilled workers 
across the District. One contact in the media and enter-
tainment industry reported that some companies were 
postponing filling vacant positions in order to offset rising 
costs from minimum wage increases. Wage growth for 
skilled and unskilled labor in the construction industry 
picked up further, and contacts reported substantial labor 
shortages among contractors in metropolitan areas. 
Prices  
Overall, price inflation increased modestly over the re-
porting period. Contacts in the hospitality and restaurant 
industries reported increasing the price of goods and 
services to offset rising labor costs. Price increases for 
branded drugs and some generic drugs moderated 
somewhat from a strong pace. In general, prices for 
commodities and agricultural goods increased minimally 
and remained relatively low. However, one contact re-
ported that steel prices strengthened from a low level 
after a modest pick-up in demand. 
Retail Trade and Services 
On balance retail sales picked up over the reporting 
period, but reports varied somewhat by sector. Holiday 
sales of beverage products were strong, particularly in 
the Mountain West, where consumer spending was 
boosted by a tight labor market and rising wages. Sales 
at apparel retailers were on par with the prior year’s 
holiday season. Demand for personal computing devices 
slowed slightly from the same period last year. Strong 
growth in e-commerce continued to reduce foot traffic at 
traditional brick-and mortar retailers, with one contact 
reporting that an apparel retailer planned to close 15 
percent of their store locations. 
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
generally grew at a strong pace. Demand for IT business 
services remained strong, and expectations of future 
increases in the demand for cloud computing services 
boosted infrastructure investment in data centers. Sales 
of gaming products picked up, particularly for games 
sold through online channels. Growth in e-commerce 
sales increased demand for transportation services, with 
one contact noting that holiday sales had nearly doubled 
volumes from their typical daily level. Contacts in the 
tourism industry noted that air travel demand was around 
the same level as the previous year’s holiday season. 
Hotel bookings grew moderately compared with last 
year’s holiday season, and one contact noted that ad-
vance 2017 holiday bookings have already surpassed 
The Beige Book ■ January 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
levels experienced as of this time last year. Contacts 
observed that demand for restaurant and dining services 
remained sluggish, in part due to adverse holiday weath-
er in the Pacific Northwest. Uncertainty surrounding 
fiscal policy and the future of the Affordable Care Act 
reduced providers’ demand for some health-care goods 
and services.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity was mixed across sectors but 
largely flat on balance over the reporting period. Produc-
tion of pharmaceuticals continued to grow at a strong 
pace, and contacts reported robust merger and acquisi-
tion activity throughout the industry. Demand for energy 
generation from manufacturers picked up from a low 
level. Deliveries and new orders for commercial aircraft 
declined relative to the same period a year earlier. In the 
steel manufacturing sector production was suppressed 
by increased global supply, dollar appreciation, and 
sluggish demand growth from domestic energy produc-
ers.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector was mixed over the 
reporting period. Demand for timber products remained 
strong. Harvests of cherries and apples grew at a moder-
ate pace. Profit margins in the dairy industry improved 
somewhat. However, contacts noted that dairy produc-
ers’ investment in equipment was sluggish and focused 
on replacing aging machinery. Dollar appreciation 
slowed beef exports, and profitability remains a concern 
for many producers. Contacts reported that some farm-
ers in California took land out of production due to 
drought conditions and labor shortages.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate market activity continued to grow at a strong 
pace. On balance, activity in the housing market re-
mained strong, yet the pace of growth in metropolitan 
centers outpaced that in rural areas. Contacts in the 
Pacific Northwest and Mountain West reported that, 
while housing demand remained high, construction 
activity was constrained by shortages in available land, 
labor, and materials. Demand for new commercial con-
struction strengthened, and one contact noted that activi-
ty in the Sacramento area remained robust. Overall, the 
pace of price increases in the housing market picked up 
further, yet a few contacts noted that the pace in their 
regions had slowed slightly. Prices for commercial real 
estate increased, and vacancy rates remained at histori-
cal low levels. 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew at a moderate pace over the re-
porting period. Loan demand expanded, and competition 
for borrowers remained elevated. On balance, deposits 
grew at a moderate pace, with one contact in the Moun-
tain West noting that strong economic growth led to a 
surge in deposits at banks in the region. Credit quality 
strengthened, and liquidity remains ample. Contacts 
noted that regulatory costs continued to constrain profita-
bility at community banks in some regions. ■ 


