The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
November 29, 2017 
November 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
based on information collected on or before November 17, 2017. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to increase at a modest to moderate pace in October and mid-November, according to 
anecdotal reports from contacts across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. There was a slight improvement in the outlook 
among contacts in reporting Districts. Pre-holiday reports of consumer spending on retail and autos were mixed but 
largely flat; still, the outlook for holiday sales was generally optimistic. Many Districts highlighted growth in the transpor-
tation sector, although the New York District reported a slight softening and the San Francisco District noted that North-
ern California wildfires temporarily reduced shipping volumes. Residential real estate activity remained constrained, 
with most Districts reporting little growth in sales or construction. By contrast, nonresidential activity was consistent with 
previous reports of slight growth. Loan demand was steady to moderately stronger. All Districts reported that manufac-
turing activity expanded during the reporting period, with most describing growth as moderate. Among reporting Dis-
tricts, manufacturing contacts predominantly expected activity to continue to pick up, although the Philadelphia and St. 
Louis Districts noted signs of a slowdown.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment growth has increased since the previous report, with most Districts characterizing growth as modest to 
moderate. Reports of tightness in the labor market were widespread. Most Districts reported employers were having 
difficulties finding qualified workers across various skill levels, and several Districts reported that an inability to find 
workers with the required skills was a key factor restraining hiring plans. Wage growth was modest or moderate in most 
Districts. Wage increases were most notable for professional, technical, and production positions that remain difficult to 
fill. Many Districts reported that employers were raising wages as well as increasing their use of signing bonuses and 
other nonwage benefits to retain or attract employees. 
Prices 
Price pressures have strengthened since the last report. Most Districts reported modest to moderate growth in selling 
prices and moderate increases in non-labor input costs. In particular, construction-material costs rose in most regions, 
with many Districts citing increased lumber costs and/or increases in demand for materials due to hurricane rebuilding 
efforts. Residential real estate prices generally increased as well. There were also reports of increases in costs in the 
transportation sector. Additionally, several Districts noted input cost increases in manufacturing. In many cases, these 
increases in transportation and manufacturing were passed through to consumers. Fuel prices also rose, with multiple 
Districts reporting upward pressure on oil and natural gas prices. However, agricultural price pressures remain mixed. 
Boston 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest to 
moderate pace according to responding manufacturers, 
retailers, and staffing services firms. Labor markets 
remained tight and some employers reported modest 
wage increases. Price changes, if any, were limited. 
Respondents’ outlooks continued to be positive. 
 
New York 
Economic activity continued to expand moderately, while 
labor markets have remained tight. Input prices contin-
ued to rise moderately, and selling prices rose modestly. 
Housing markets and commercial real estate markets 
have been mixed but generally stable. 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall, economic activity continued at a modest pace of 
growth, in particular for manufacturing, nonfinancial 
services, and tourism. Residential and nonresidential 
construction and real estate activity increased slightly, 
while auto sales and non-auto retail sales declined 
slightly. On balance, wages and prices continued to grow 
modestly, while employment resumed a modest pace of 
growth. 
Cleveland 
Business activity increased from that of the previous 
reporting period, but the overall pace of growth was 
moderate. Upward pressure increased further on wages, 
non-labor input costs, and selling prices. Retailers noted 
a boost in store traffic. Capacity constraints in freight 
transportation tightened. The first-time home-buyer 
market may be negatively impacted by rising costs and 
low inventory. 
Richmond 
The regional economy continued to grow at a moderate 
rate, overall. Manufacturing and transportation activity 
remained strong. Retailers were optimistic about the 
upcoming holiday shopping season. Residential home 
sales rose only modestly due to low inventories. Labor 
markets tightened further, which drove up wages for 
some workers. Price growth remained modest, overall. 
Atlanta 
Economic conditions modestly improved since the previ-
ous report. Tightness in the labor market persisted and 
wages grew modestly. Non-labor costs remained little 
changed. Retail sales increased across most of the 
District. Tourism activity was mostly positive. Home 
sales were flat to down, and home prices improved 
slightly. Manufacturers indicated that activity modestly 
increased. Credit was available. 
Chicago 
Economic activity increased slightly. Employment and 
manufacturing production increased modestly, while 
consumer spending, business spending, and construc-
tion and real estate activity increased slightly. Wages 
rose modestly and prices rose slightly. Financial condi-
tions were little changed. Crop yields were below last 
year’s records. 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have improved at a modest pace 
since our previous report. Labor market conditions re-
main tight, as most firms reported raising starting wages 
and salaries as a way to attract new workers. The out-
look among firms surveyed in mid-November was gener-
ally optimistic. Though slightly weaker than the outlook 
from our mid-August survey, it is a modest improvement 
from the outlook one year ago. 
Minneapolis 
Economic activity in the Ninth District grew modestly. 
Employment continued to grow, though constrained by 
tight labor and some isolated softness, including plant 
closures. Several indicators suggested that conditions in 
South Dakota were improving. Manufacturing remained 
upbeat, and commercial and residential real estate saw 
growth. Agriculture continued to struggle, as strong 
harvests were not expected to offset low commodity 
prices. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased moder-
ately. Manufacturing and other business services ex-
panded at a strong to moderate pace, and energy activi-
ty continued to increase modestly. Consumer spending 
was mostly flat, with moderate growth expected. Agricul-
tural conditions weakened but at a slower pace, and 
many respondents noted increased hiring plans. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately, and business had 
mostly returned to normal after Hurricane Harvey. The 
manufacturing sector remained a bright spot, and nonfi-
nancial services activity continued to expand. Growth in 
the energy sector subsided, but there was increased 
optimism for 2018. Retail sales remained strong and 
auto sales were still elevated, but the initial post-
hurricane surge had begun to recede. Labor shortages 
persisted, and there were widespread reports of in-
creased wages. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Sales of retail goods grew 
moderately, and growth in the consumer and business 
services sectors remained strong. Conditions in the 
manufacturing sector remained solid. Activity in residen-
tial real estate markets remained robust, while conditions 
in the commercial sector were strong. Lending activity 
grew at a moderate pace. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the First District continued to expand at a modest to moderate pace in recent weeks. With a few 
exceptions, contacted retailers and manufacturers cited positive growth in sales or revenues. Most responding staffing 
firms also realized revenue gains, even in the face of limited available labor. Commercial real estate markets were said 
to be largely unchanged, with growth sectors and levels of activity varying across metro areas in the District. Most resi-
dential real estate markets in the region continued to be constrained by low inventories of homes for sale; meanwhile, 
median sales prices rose in five of the six New England states. Retailers and manufacturers retained positive outlooks 
about the US economy and customer demand. 
Employment and Wages  
Respondents said hiring has generally been modest, 
partly because of short supplies of labor, and wage 
increases were becoming somewhat more widespread. 
A couple of retail contacts expected to offer 2018 merit 
raises on the order of 2 percent to 3 percent; retailers 
were hiring only in connection with new store openings. 
Only two manufacturing contacts reported significant 
hiring, both in semiconductor-related markets. A maker 
of testing equipment said that they were hiring mostly 
outside the United States; another indicated that salaries 
were rising significantly only for engineers who remain 
difficult to hire and retain. At staffing firms, bill rates and 
pay rates have reportedly begun to rise at a faster pace, 
and clients were offering more generous signing bonus-
es, paid leave, and other perks to attract talent.  
Prices  
Business respondents indicated little change in prices or 
pricing practices. Retail contacts reported that selling 
prices mostly remained steady, though some items saw 
moderate 1 percent to 3 percent increases. None of our 
manufacturing contacts reported notable pricing strength 
or weakness. 
Retail 
Retailers reported that sales in October through mid-
November remained even or grew by mid-single-digit 
percentages compared to a year earlier. These increas-
es principally came from new store openings or new 
business ventures, as year-over-year comparable-store 
sales were characterized by low single-digit decreases 
or growth of less than 1 percent. A couple of retailers 
said that weather conditions, both the hurricanes in the 
southeastern United States and warmer-than-usual fall 
weather in the Northeast, contributed to these modest 
comparable-store results. However, they also said the 
results were indicative of larger shifts in the US retail 
environment, along with changing demographics: Baby 
Boomers are now at ages when they spend less on 
consumer goods like clothing and housewares, while 
younger adults are more apt to shop online rather than in 
stores. A competitive retail environment has also taught 
consumers to wait for sales, such as the discounts of-
fered on Black Friday and pre-Black Friday promotions. 
The holiday season is expected to help bolster year-end 
revenues so that final fiscal year results show positive 
growth in the low single digits. Despite the challenging 
US retail environment that is prompting at least one 
contact to take a more conservative stance in 2018, 
most respondents said the US economy is strong and 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
this factor, combined with high employment and healthy 
labor markets, will encourage consumer spending.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of the eight firms we contacted this cycle, six reported 
year-on-year sales growth in the most recent quarter. 
The two exceptions were a furniture company which 
suspected that the weakness was largely seasonal and a 
paper manufacturer which said that sales were flat and 
that significant marketing was required to avoid declining 
sales. Three semiconductor-related firms reported 
strength. One of our contacts in that industry said that 
demand growth had previously been confined to the auto 
industry but that in recent months, other parts of their 
market expanded. A manufacturer of testing equipment 
said that most of their demand growth came from Eu-
rope, especially Germany, and that US growth was 
slowed by the hurricanes. A manufacturer of veterinary 
supplies said that people were willing to spend more and 
more on their pets. Two firms reported upward revisions 
to their capital spending plans, but both described them 
as idiosyncratic to the firm. 
All the manufacturing respondents were optimistic about 
2018. A maker of semiconductor equipment said that the 
industry may reach the peak of its cycle relatively soon.  
Staffing Services 
New England staffing firms reported mixed results in 
year-over-year revenue growth, with the majority of 
respondents achieving positive growth. All firms re-
marked heavily on the sparse supply of labor and in-
creased search cost in locating talent while noting that 
labor demand remains very strong across the board. 
Health and tech jobs were reportedly particularly difficult 
to fill. Several also noted that increasing options for job 
seekers were resulting in more declined job offers and 
putting pressure on hiring firms to improve their packag-
es for prospective employees. Most are devoting re-
sources to improving their recruitment, both in technolog-
ical efficiency and increased advertising, looking for new 
ways to reach potential hires. Contacts expressed some 
concern over uncertainty in health insurance markets, 
local minimum wage increases, and potential changes in 
the federal tax code, and what these would mean for the 
labor market.  
All respondents expected tight labor market conditions to 
continue into 2018, and most saw a more challenging 
market for staffing firms with increased competition for 
the remaining labor supply.  
 
 
Commercial Real Estate 
According to contacts, commercial real estate fundamen-
tals in the First District were mostly flat in recent weeks 
amid mixed leasing activity. Office leasing activity stayed 
light in Hartford and Portland and moderate in Provi-
dence, while robust activity was seen in downtown Bos-
ton. Class A office space has become quite scarce in 
Providence, resulting in competition among tenants and 
upward pressure on rents. Buyer demand for warehouse 
and industrial space remained strong throughout the 
region, but (except for one large transaction) sales were 
restrained by lack of inventory. There were signs of an 
uptick in condominium development activity in greater 
Boston, along with further moderation in apartment con-
struction. Investment sales demand in Boston held 
steady or softened slightly, and prices for prime proper-
ties held steady. Office construction remained limited in 
New England, while construction by medical and educa-
tional institutions continued to strengthen, and in the 
Portland area hotel construction increased further. Most 
contacts expect either steady or improving fundamentals 
moving forward, but the outlook remained weaker for 
Hartford than for other major metro areas in the District.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District contin-
ued to struggle with dwindling inventory and appreciating 
home prices (September prices constitute the most 
recent data in five of the seven areas, while New Hamp-
shire and Vermont reported October-to-October chang-
es). Closed sales for single family homes decreased in 
all areas but Maine and Vermont. For condos, closed 
sales were down in Massachusetts, Boston, and Con-
necticut, and up elsewhere.  
As usual, many contacts cited upward pressure on pric-
es as an issue resulting from the shortage of inventory. 
For single family homes, the median sales prices were 
up in all areas but Connecticut. Condo prices displayed a 
similar upward trend, except in Boston and Vermont. 
Residential contacts expressed concern about the possi-
ble impact of the tax reform bill in Congress, which they 
feared could increase the cost of buying a home and 
disrupt the housing market.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District continued to grow at a moderate pace in the latest reporting period, and the 
labor market has been steady and tight. Input prices continued to increase moderately, and selling prices continued to 
rise modestly. Manufacturers reported that growth slowed to a moderate pace, while businesses engaged in wholesale 
trade, leisure & hospitality, and professional & business services reported brisk growth. However, contacts in health & 
education services and transportation noted slight softening in activity. Consumer spending was generally steady since 
the last report, as was consumer confidence. Housing markets have been mixed, with particular weakness at the high 
end of both the sales and rental markets. Commercial real estate markets were steady, on balance. New residential 
development and office construction have slowed, but new industrial development has picked up. Finally, banks report-
ed a pullback in demand for home mortgage loans and ongoing declines in delinquency rates across all loan categories.    
   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has been steady and tight. Employ-
ment agencies generally report that labor market condi-
tions have been little changed. Still, one major New York 
City agency notes that hiring activity has been busy for 
this time of year. Businesses have reported ongoing 
difficulty finding qualified workers, particularly in manu-
facturing.   
Business contacts across most industries indicated that 
they continue to increase staffing levels modestly. Simi-
larly, hiring plans for the months ahead have remained 
moderately positive, on net, with particularly strong hiring 
expected in the finance sector. A contact in upstate New 
York noted that some retailers plan less seasonal hiring 
this year.  
Overall, contacts indicated that wages have continued to 
rise modestly. Further, businesses in a broad range of 
industries said they plan to raise wages in the months 
ahead—most notably in the leisure & hospitality, educa-
tion & health, transportation, and trade sectors.       
Prices  
Input prices have continued to rise moderately in most 
industry sectors, with the exception of retail, where con-
tacts reported more significant cost increases.  
Selling prices overall continued to rise modestly, though 
contacts in the leisure & hospitality industries noted 
stronger price increases. But within that sector, for ex-
ample, price increases have varied: while hotel room 
rates have been essentially flat, Broadway theater ticket 
prices have accelerated and were up more than 15 
percent from a year earlier. In general, retail prices have 
been stable, though some general merchandise stores 
noted increased discounting. Looking ahead, the only 
sectors in which businesses planned any noticeable 
price hikes were in wholesale trade and transportation.    
Consumer Spending 
Retail contacts reported that sales have been steady in 
recent weeks. Retailers in upstate New York indicated 
that both traffic and sales activity remained steady. Con-
tacts in the New York City area gave a mixed assess-
ment, but overall sales were little changed. Retail busi-
nesses were mildly optimistic about the near-term out-
look, and inventories were said to be in good shape.  
Auto sales have been mixed but, on balance, steady 
since the last report. Dealers in upstate New York report-
ed that demand for new vehicles remained fairly robust 
in October but not quite on par with September’s brisk 
levels. However, scattered increases were reported  in 
used vehicle sales. Vehicle inventories were said to be a 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
bit on the high side but mostly at satisfactory levels. 
Retail and wholesale credit conditions have remained 
favorable, according to dealers. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA), held steady at a high level in October.    
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported continued growth in business 
activity in recent weeks, though to a lesser degree than 
in recent months. Contacts in the wholesale trade sector 
noted a further acceleration in business, whereas trans-
portation firms reported some pullback in activity. Look-
ing ahead, manufacturers continued to express wide-
spread optimism about the near-term outlook, while 
wholesale distributors and transportation firms were 
moderately optimistic.      
Services 
Service-sector firms noted some pickup in growth. Con-
tacts in leisure & hospitality and professional & business 
services reported fairly widespread increases in activity, 
while information industry firms indicated modest im-
provement. Education & health service providers indicat-
ed that activity was flat to slightly lower, on balance. 
Service sector businesses were generally optimistic 
about the near-term outlook—particularly those in busi-
ness & professional services.  
New York City hotels reported brisk business, though an 
expanding supply of hotel rooms, largely in a moderate 
price range, has held room rates down. Broadway thea-
ters reported that attendance was flat to somewhat lower 
in October and early November and down from a year 
earlier. An authority on New York City’s tourism industry 
noted that domestic tourism has been increasingly ro-
bust, while tourism from overseas has receded, though 
by less than had been expected.         
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, stable. Real estate contacts in upstate 
New York report that sales volume has receded some-
what but remains quite strong, while prices have contin-
ued to climb, driven by sturdy demand and low invento-
ries. Housing markets across New York State have 
exhibited a similar pattern, with prices statewide running 
about 6 percent ahead of a year ago. Northern New 
Jersey’s market, in contrast, has seen sales volume 
growing but prices generally flat. Similarly, sales of New 
York City co-ops and condos have picked up, while 
prices have been mixed but overall flat—rising modestly 
at the low to middle range of the market but declining at 
the high end. One contact noted that some newly-
developed high-end properties have recently sold for 
roughly 25 percent below the initial asking price.  
Rental markets have been steady to softer. Rents across 
New York City have edged down overall, again led by 
the high end of the market, where landlord concessions 
have remained steady at high levels. Manhattan’s rental 
vacancy rate, though still quite low, has reportedly risen 
for three straight months.  
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed. Office 
availability rates have climbed modestly in New York City 
and Long Island but have remained essentially flat 
across the rest of New York State, southwestern Con-
necticut and northern New Jersey. Asking rents have 
risen in Manhattan and upstate New York but remained 
flat elsewhere. The market for industrial space has re-
mained fairly strong. In upstate New York, industrial 
rents have continued to rise at a nearly 10 percent pace, 
while vacancy rates have declined to multi-year lows. 
Industrial rents have risen at a more than 5 percent rate 
in downstate New York and northern New Jersey, while 
vacancy rates in those areas remain steady near multi-
year lows. Retail vacancy rates have continued to rise 
across New York City.   
New multi-family construction has wound down through-
out the District, though a good deal of residential space 
remains under construction. New commercial develop-
ment has slowed as well. New office development has 
picked up in Long Island but has largely ground to a halt 
elsewhere. New industrial development, on the other 
hand, has picked up in New York City’s outer boroughs 
and in upstate New York and remains at a fairly brisk 
level in northern New Jersey.     
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
lower demand for residential mortgages, higher demand 
for commercial mortgages and C&I loans, and steady 
demand for consumer loans. Bankers also reported that 
refinancing activity decreased, on balance, for all types 
of loans. Credit standards were reported to be un-
changed across all loan categories. Bankers noted lower 
loan spreads for C&I loans, and unchanged spreads 
across all other loan categories. Finally, banks reported 
lower delinquency rates in all loan categories.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Manufacturing, nonfinancial services, and tourism grew modestly, while new home construction, existing home 
sales, nonresidential construction, and leasing appeared to grow slightly. Auto sales and nonauto retail sales appeared 
to decline slightly, after growing and remaining steady, respectively, during the prior period. On balance, employment 
resumed a modest pace of growth, and wages and prices continued to grow modestly. Overall, firms appear to antici-
pate continued growth over the next six months, but with a somewhat smaller percentage of firms expecting growth. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment resumed a modest pace of growth during 
the current Beige Book period following a lull during the 
prior period. Reports of net additions to staff rose for 
both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms. Aver-
age hours worked changed little over the period for 
manufacturing firms but dipped a bit among nonmanu-
facturers. Retailers reported little change to their typical 
hiring plans in preparation for the holidays.  
On balance, wage growth held steady at a modest pace, 
with about 40 percent of nonmanufacturing firms report-
ing increases. Numerous firms have reported a lack of 
qualified labor for skilled positions or that they are offer-
ing a somewhat higher entry-level wage to attract labor. 
Staffing firms continued to report difficulties filling job 
orders and noted that an inordinate amount of their 
business is refilling positions due to turnovers, including 
quits by recent placements.   
Prices  
On balance, price levels continued to rise modestly. 
Across all contacts, the percentage of firms reporting 
increases in prices received for their own goods and 
services was lower during the current period than the 
prior period. For prices paid, the percentage of manufac-
turing firms reporting increases changed little, while the 
percentage of nonmanufacturing firms rose. A majority of 
contacts indicated no change in prices paid and re-
ceived. 
Retailers and banking contacts continued to report no 
signs of inflationary pressure, while homebuilders, re-
ported increases for a broadening array of construction 
materials, including lumber and products containing 
petroleum. Overall, existing home prices continued to 
edge up, with some variance across markets and price 
categories.  
Looking ahead one year, firms anticipate a 2.1 percent 
increase in prices received for their own goods and 
services — a bit lower than one quarter prior. Firms also 
reported expectations of about 2.4 percent annual infla-
tion for consumers — also lower than earlier in the fall. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity continued at a mod-
est pace of growth, but signs of a slowdown emerged. 
The percentage of firms reporting increases in new 
orders and shipments fell compared with the prior period.  
The makers of paper products, chemicals, primary metal 
products, fabricated metal products, and industrial ma-
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
chinery continued to note gains in new orders and ship-
ments; firms in the lumber and electronic equipment 
sectors reported declines in activity.  
Generally, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
growth over the next six months. The percentage of firms 
expecting future increases for general activity dipped 
somewhat but remains above 50 percent. However, the 
percentage of firms expecting increases held mostly 
steady regarding future capital expenditures and rose a 
bit for future employment.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales may have fallen slightly, 
essentially little changed from the prior Beige Book peri-
od. Mall and outlets operators noted that unseasonably 
warm weather depressed sales of winter apparel. An 
outlets operator reported that overall October sales were 
flat compared with last year. Convenience store contacts 
reported that business remained soft, as customers 
chase value and competition expands.  
Auto dealers reported slight declines overall in year-over
-year sales this period, a retreat from the modest in-
creases during the prior period. Dealers were hopeful for 
stronger sales at year end, beginning with Black Friday, 
to boost 2017 totals. Manufacturers continued to provide 
incentives for dealers to sustain sales. 
Tourism contacts generally indicated a continuation of 
modest growth. A Philadelphia analyst reported that 
overall travel demand remains stronger than in the prior 
year period, locally and nationally. In September, Atlantic 
City’s casino revenues resumed a modest rate of growth 
relative to the prior year and sustained that growth in 
October. A Delaware shore hotel operator noted some 
weakening of rooms booked, room rates, and overall 
levels of spending at area stores and restaurants; how-
ever, the prior year had been very strong.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Service-sector firms have continued to report modest 
growth in general activity since the prior Beige Book 
period; however, new orders and sales softened some-
what, as did reports of general activity. Expectations 
about future growth have lessened somewhat since the 
prior Beige Book period but remained positive, with 
about 50 percent of the firms anticipating increased 
activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth of overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) — similar to the prior 
Beige Book period. Loan volumes grew modestly in most 
categories, including mortgages, commercial real estate, 
commercial and industrial loans, and other consumer 
loans. Growth in auto loan volumes was stronger, while 
home equity lines were flat over the period. Credit card 
volumes — which are highly seasonal — changed little 
over the Beige Book period, which is similar to the same 
period last year.  
Banking contacts tended to describe economic growth 
as slow and steady. On balance, loan portfolios were 
described as healthy, with low delinquencies and no 
significant signs of concern.  
Real Estate and Construction 
After little change through the summer and early fall, 
homebuilders generally reported a slight pickup in activi-
ty during the current period, particularly in the early 
weeks of November. In one area where single-family 
home construction remained weak, a builder noted that 
demand for remodeling work was strong.  
On balance, brokers in Third District housing markets 
reported that ongoing weak inventory levels have slowed 
existing home sales to a slight pace of growth in the 
current period. Vacation home markets are an exception 
due to a recent resurgence of second home purchases.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts continued to report 
slight growth at high levels in construction activity. Archi-
tecture and engineering contacts reported record years, 
with particularly strong demand for institutional and 
energy-related projects. Industrial/warehouse markets 
throughout the Third District are generally characterized 
by rising rates and ongoing strong demand for new 
construction. Leasing activity also appeared to grow 
slightly, although markets vary significantly by sector and 
geography. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity grew at a moderate pace in the Fourth District since our last report. Labor markets continued to tight-
en. Challenges in attracting and retaining qualified workers contributed to wage pressures. Supply chain disruptions 
furthered upward pressure on input costs. Retailers saw a boost in brick-and-mortar traffic, while new motor vehicle 
sales strengthened. Manufacturing output grew at a modest pace overall, but production at District motor vehicle assem-
bly plants trended lower. Nonfinancial services and freight transport firms saw moderate to strong gains in activity. 
Homebuilders and realtors expressed concern about the impact of rising home prices on the first-time buyer market. 
Activity in commercial real estate remained elevated.  
Employment and Wages  
A boost in hiring that began in the third quarter continued 
during the survey period. The strongest activity was 
found in the construction and nonfinancial services sec-
tors. Retailers reported a seasonal increase in payrolls. 
The spike in bank hiring late in the third quarter has 
faded. Staffing changes at banks are now in line with 
levels seen for most of 2017. A majority of contacts 
reported they are replacing departed workers and that 
the share of firms creating new jobs remains high. At-
tracting and retaining qualified workers, both low- and 
high-skilled, is a challenge facing many of our contacts 
across industry sectors. A growing number of firms 
reported increasing wages more frequently or giving mid-
year bonuses as a means of retention. The strongest 
wage pressures were found in the banking and retail 
sectors.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on input costs remained strong, while 
the share of contacts who reported they were increasing 
selling prices was at its highest level since the end of the 
second quarter. Higher input costs were widespread in 
the construction, manufacturing, and nonfinancial ser-
vices sectors. Construction contractors generally attribut-
ed higher materials prices to rebuilding efforts resulting 
from recent hurricanes and ongoing disputes with Cana-
da over lumber tariffs. Manufacturers cited hurricane-
related damage to petrochemical plants as the primary 
reason for near-term price spikes for a wide-range of 
petrochemical products. One report indicated that the 
price of resins has risen 20 percent. Another manufactur-
er pointed to speculation driving up commodity prices to 
unsustainably high levels, causing material costs to grow 
significantly. However, he expects these prices to fall 
from these high levels. The home building and freight 
hauling industries reported the highest share of compa-
nies raising their selling prices. Several freight haulers 
reported that FEMA contracted with carriers from across 
the country to assist in hurricane rebuilding, further limit-
ing freight capacity, which is already tight. The end result 
is a boost in freight rates and higher labor costs. Once 
the hurricane damage is overcome, expectations are that 
freight rates will decline.  
Consumer Spending 
Retailers’ outlooks were generally more upbeat when 
compared to their outlooks during recent reporting peri-
ods. A few contacts noted that efforts to improve the 
customers’ shopping experiences, including technology 
upgrades, have resulted in increased store traffic. A 
specialty apparel chain reported that consumers seemed 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
a little more confident and that the chain’s products are 
resonating with customers. A furniture retailer said that 
despite higher expectations set earlier in the year, he is 
still experiencing revenue growth across his stores rang-
ing from 2 percent to 5 percent. Most contacts are cau-
tiously optimistic heading into the holiday shopping sea-
son. Year-to-date unit sales through September of new 
motor vehicles rose 2 percent compared to those of a 
year ago. That said, auto dealers reported that they are 
starting to see a slowing in demand after seven consecu-
tive years of gains. One OEM remarked that the outlook 
for 2018 and 2019 is uncertain, but early projections call 
for new vehicle transactions nationally to decline about 2 
percent from 2017 levels.   
Manufacturing 
Little change was seen in the manufacturing sector 
during the period, with output largely expanding at a 
modest pace. The strongest levels of activity were re-
ported by suppliers to the aerospace, consumer elec-
tronics, motor vehicle, oil and gas, and residential con-
struction industries. An aerospace executive noted that 
her industry is reporting strong backlogs and order books 
and more aggressive production schedules. Steel pro-
ducers and service centers are seeing rising volume. 
One service center indicated that volume increased 13 
percent when compared to year-ago levels. Year-to-date 
production through September at District auto assembly 
plants declined about 20 percent when compared to that 
of the same period a year earlier. The decrease can be 
attributed to retooling for two next-generation vehicles 
and to cutbacks in small passenger car production. 
Manufacturers reported an increase in spending for plant 
expansions and product development after spending 
declines in the third quarter. The outlook by our contacts 
calls for a gradual pickup in the pace of growth in the 
near term.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Year-to-date unit sales through September of new and 
existing single-family homes increased 1 percent com-
pared to those of a year earlier. The average sales price 
rose 5 percent. Homebuilders are concerned about rising 
input costs (land, development, materials, and labor) and 
the negative impact these costs may have on the first-
time buyer market. One builder reported that he can no 
longer build a starter home for less than $200,000. A 
realtor noted that although the market is seeing a high 
number of first-time buyers, the major challenge is a 
shortage of properties, a limitation which results in multi-
ple-offer situations. 
  
Comments from commercial contractors were mainly 
unchanged from our last report. Activity remains at ele-
vated levels. Property development was broad based 
except in retail, for which demand continued to be weak. 
Backlogs were stable at high levels. The downturn in 
inquires cited in the third quarter has abated. A moderate 
increase was reported in selling prices for office and 
industrial properties during the first nine months of 2017 
compared to those of the same period a year ago. Dur-
ing the same time-frame, reports indicated a decline in 
the number of apartments coming on the market. Apart-
ment rents continued to trend moderately higher.  
Banking 
Business and consumer lending increased during the 
period, but both segments reported a modest pace of 
growth. On the business side, M&A financing and CRE 
loans are healthy, while the market for C&I loans to 
manufacturers is soft. Indirect auto lending and purchase 
mortgages remain relatively strong. When asked about 
why lending is not growing at a more robust pace, one 
banker reported that because of government uncertainty, 
customers are moving back to the sidelines. Another 
contact said that although the economic environment is 
positive, it is not yet strong. Some bankers mentioned 
their uncertainty about how much of their market share is 
being captured by non-bank lenders, especially for C&I 
loans. Credit quality was stable at a strong level.  
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Freight volume generally increased beyond what can be 
accounted for by seasonal factors. Rail and trucking 
firms cited growth in manufacturing output and the ener-
gy sector and a need to deliver supplies for hurricane 
relief as driving stronger demand. There is concern 
about the industry’s facing capacity constraints by year’s 
end because of electronic logging device requirements 
and rebuilding from recent hurricanes. 
Professional and business services firms saw moderate 
to strong gains in activity during the period. Engineering 
and architecture firms attributed the gains to clients’ 
rising capital budgets. One architect reported a two-year 
backlog. An IT firm remarked that clients continue to 
migrate toward cloud-based solutions versus premise-
based solutions as clients struggle to staff their own IT 
departments. ■ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy grew at a moderate rate since our last Beige Book report. Manufacturers noted a moderate 
rise in new orders and shipments, and they generally expected strong growth over the next six months. District ports 
continued to see high volumes, particularly for imports. Trucking firms reported robust growth, in part due to relief ship-
ments being sent to hurricane-affected areas. Retailers were optimistic ahead of the holiday shopping season. Tourism 
remained robust as mild weather helped boost activity. Residential home sales rose modestly and the inventory of hous-
es for sale remained low. Commercial real estate leasing increased moderately. Residential loan demand was little 
changed in recent weeks, while commercial, small business, and agriculture lending picked up. Nonfinancial services 
firms reported moderate revenue growth. The demand for labor increased moderately in recent weeks while wage in-
creases remained modest. Prices continued to grow at a modest pace.  
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks as employment agencies reported growth in new 
job openings across all industries and anticipated contin-
ued high demand for the rest of the year. Employers 
continued to report a tight labor market with limited sup-
ply of qualified candidates. Executives noted difficulty 
finding skilled mechanics, electricians, engineers, infor-
mation technology specialists, hospitality workers, nurs-
es, truck drivers, construction managers, and construc-
tion workers. Additionally, retailers had difficulties finding 
extra seasonal help. Wage increases remained modest, 
overall, but contacts continued to suggest that wage 
pressures increased. In particular, wages reportedly rose 
for airport workers, truck drivers, and for some nonfinan-
cial services workers that were in high demand.  
Prices  
Since our previous report, prices continued to grow at a 
moderate rate. According to our latest surveys, manufac-
turing input prices rose moderately while final goods 
prices rose more modestly. There were reports of manu-
facturers paying higher prices for plastics, lumber, cop-
per, electricity, and freight. Additionally, a paper manu-
facturer noted a substantial increase in pulp prices. In 
the service sector, price growth remained modest over-
all, with some instances of larger price increases. For 
example, an IT service provider noted that it was able to 
raise prices considerably in recent months without losing 
any customers. Likewise, an elevator servicing firm was 
raising prices substantially across all lines of business 
(routine service, repair, and modernization). Food ser-
vices firms reported modest price increases across many 
food categories. Both manufacturing and services firms 
commented on rising health insurance costs.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing firms reported moderate 
growth in new orders and shipments in recent weeks. 
Manufacturers of plastic, rubber, paper, and transporta-
tion equipment noted strong growth in new orders. Also, 
electrical and medical equipment producers saw in-
creased sales. Contacts experienced longer vendor lead 
times, and some businesses continued to report delayed 
customer shipments due to Hurricane Irma and Hurri-
cane Harvey. Expectations were more upbeat, as pro-
ducers anticipated strong increases in new orders and 
shipments for the next six months.  
Ports and Transportation 
District ports reported increases in shipments in recent 
months, driven mainly by growth in imports. One District 
port noted that it handled more volume in October than 
in any month on record. Ports remained optimistic that 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
shipments would remain high in the near future.  
Trucking companies in the District saw robust business 
growth in recent months. Firms continued to report in-
creased demand and higher prices as relief shipments 
were sent to hurricane affected areas. A shortage of 
drivers has persisted in the District, even as firms raised 
wages, leading some trucking companies to turn away 
business.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Reports on retail sales were somewhat positive in recent 
weeks. Many District retailers noted moderate growth in 
sales so far this year and were optimistic heading into 
the holiday season. A Virginia home decor store reported 
customer traffic above the seasonal norm and strong 
sales even as prices rose. On the downside, some small 
clothing stores saw slightly weaker sales. A South Caro-
lina auto dealer reported robust growth. However, a 
Virginia auto dealer reported a drop in sales of high-end 
vehicles.  
Tourism has remained robust since our previous report. 
Hotels across the District reported that bookings were up 
over last year, and a South Carolina hotel had record 
revenues in October. A Virginia resort attributed recent 
increases in bookings and golfing to good weather. 
Conversely, visits to D.C. museums and monuments fell 
slightly.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate firms indicated modest growth, 
overall. District agents reported steady levels of buyer 
traffic, although home sales rose only modestly due to 
very limited inventory. Home prices continued to rise 
modestly. Average days on the market decreased since 
the previous report, as most contacts stated that homes 
were on the market for about 45 days. In some markets, 
brokers said that they have seen more appraisals com-
ing in under contract price due to limited comparable 
home sales. Although new home sales continued to 
improve modestly, new home construction remained 
subdued.   
Commercial real estate leasing rose moderately in re-
cent weeks. Contacts reported increased leasing activity 
for large industrial space and small retail space, while 
office leasing rose modestly for urban class A space. 
Vacancy rates remained low across all sub-markets. In 
particular, brokers said that large industrial and distribu-
tion spaces were in high demand, but limited supply. 
Rental rates increased moderately for retail and industri-
al spaces, and some executives reported modest in-
creases for urban office space. Commercial construction 
increased for several types of structures, including indus-
trial, class A office, grocery-anchored shopping centers, 
and medical projects. Brokers indicated that the number 
of newly announced multifamily construction projects 
decreased across the District. 
Banking and Finance 
On the whole, loan demand increased modestly since 
our previous report. Residential mortgage demand was 
generally characterized as stable. A lender in Virginia 
reported an increase in mortgage loans, but attributed it 
to more advertising and concessions on closing costs. 
Meanwhile, a banker in North Carolina said the low 
inventory of homes for sale was restraining mortgage 
loan growth. Commercial lending activity rose moderate-
ly in recent weeks. A banker in Baltimore saw an in-
crease in commercial real estate lending for multi-family 
and senior housing facilities. Small business and agricul-
ture lending rose modestly, according to contacts in 
Virginia and North Carolina. On balance, interest rates 
and net interest margins increased slightly in recent 
weeks. Credit quality remained strong while credit stand-
ards were generally unchanged.  
Non-Financial Services 
District services firms reported moderate growth in reve-
nues in recent weeks. The strongest reports came from 
wholesalers, telecom firms, performing arts centers, 
vehicle repair services, and utilities. A contact from a 
Maryland utility company said business was growing 
week after week. Likewise, a Virginia natural gas utility 
reported that revenues were growing as temperatures 
were falling in recent weeks. Business also picked up for 
legal firms, accounting firms, defense contractors, and IT 
service providers across the District. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from Sixth District business contacts described economic conditions as modestly improving since the previous 
report. Most businesses continue to expect slow and steady growth for the remainder of the year. District firms contin-
ued to describe a tight labor market as many faced difficulty finding workers. Wage growth remained modest. On bal-
ance, nonlabor input costs were stable. Retail sales, including auto, increased across most of the District. Reports from 
the hospitality sector were mostly positive. Residential real estate contacts noted that home sales were flat to down, 
although home prices improved modestly from the previous report. Commercial real estate contacts continued to report 
that the pace of construction had picked up from a year ago. Manufacturers indicated that activity grew at a modest 
pace since the previous report. Bankers reported that ample credit was available.    
Employment and Wages  
The District, specifically Florida, incurred notable payroll 
losses in September because of Hurricane Irma. Con-
tacts continued to cite challenges filling highly skilled/
specialized and low-skilled/entry-level positions. Several 
firms noted broadening their geographical search for 
candidates, and some expanded their physical presence 
to new locations where they expected more abundant 
labor supply. In a survey of business contacts, most 
respondents indicated that they planned to increase 
employment over the next 12 months as a result of 
expected sales growth, a need for skills not possessed 
by current staff, and to mitigate concerns about current 
staff being overworked. The top factors restraining hiring 
plans were challenges finding workers with required 
skills and a desire to keep operating costs low. Amidst 
these challenges, in an effort to attract workers, most 
respondents reported that they raised wages, signing 
bonuses, or total compensation offered.  
Contacts continued to report some wage growth, with 
acceleration in highly skilled/specialized positions or in 
highly competitive geographic labor markets. Firms 
continued to use non-wage mechanisms to attract and to 
retain talent and keep wages down. Business contacts 
continued to describe efforts to enhance and modernize 
their corporate culture in order to encourage people to 
join the firm and to build loyalty among existing employ-
ees. Staffing agencies shared that from the job seeker’s 
perspective, these non-wage mechanisms were increas-
ing in importance as compared with compensation.    
Prices  
While the majority of non-labor input cost changes re-
ported were modest, several contacts mentioned a re-
cent uptick in costs, most notably in transportation. Con-
tacts also reported little pricing power. The Atlanta Fed’s 
Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-
over-year unit costs were up 1.7 percent in October. 
Survey respondents also indicated that they expect unit 
costs to rise 1.8 percent over the next twelve months.     
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Most District retailers reported that sales levels rose 
modestly since the last report. The outlook remains 
optimistic for the upcoming holiday season. Post Hurri-
cane Irma, automobile dealers noted an increase in the 
momentum of auto sales. 
District contacts noted that Florida tourism activity 
bounced back after Hurricane Irma with the exception of 
the Florida Keys. Marketing efforts across various cities 
emphasized that the state was open for tourism. Georgia 
and Louisiana contacts reported continued growth in 
business, leisure, and group travel. Year to date, Missis-
sippi casino gaming revenues decreased compared to a 
year ago. The outlook among most contacts for the first 
quarter of 2018 remains optimistic.   
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
Relative to a year-ago, District brokers and builders 
indicated home sales were flat to down in September. 
Most builders reported that buyer traffic was flat to down, 
while brokers gave mixed reports. Builders cited flat to 
higher inventory levels, while most brokers noted lower 
inventories. Most builders and brokers reported that 
home prices increased in September. Builder reports on 
construction activity came in mixed. The majority of 
builders reported labor cost increases from year-ago 
levels and most said material costs had increased over 
the same period. Over the next three months, many 
contacts expect home sales to be flat and construction 
activity to hold steady or increase slightly. The majority 
of builders and half of broker respondents indicated that 
Irma had an impact on their business and that they faced 
higher material prices, a shortage of materials in some 
cases, tighter than normal labor markets, less buyer 
traffic, and activity and sales delays. 
Many commercial real estate contacts reported improve-
ments in demand that resulted in rent growth and contin-
ued to caution that improvement varied by metropolitan 
area, submarket, and property type. The majority of 
contractors indicated that the pace of nonresidential 
construction activity had increased from one year ago; 
most reported healthy backlogs. Commercial construc-
tion contacts’ expectations for the pace of nonresidential 
construction were mixed, while their outlook for the pace 
of multifamily construction continued to level off.    
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported that business activity expanded 
at a modest pace compared with the previous period. 
Contacts indicated that production levels decreased, 
while new orders and finished inventory levels remained 
relatively flat. Hiring activity increased at a healthy pace 
and supplier delivery times were reported to be slightly 
longer than in the previous report. Purchasing managers 
stated that input prices continued to increase. Contacts’ 
outlooks for future production were relatively unchanged 
from the previous period, with about half expecting high-
er production levels over the next six months.     
Transportation 
On balance, transportation activity in the District was 
relatively unchanged since the previous report. Year to 
date, total rail traffic was down compared with year earli-
er levels, as shipments of grain, petroleum and petrole-
um products, and metallic ores declined by double digits. 
These were only slightly offset by modest increases in 
movements of pulp and paper products, non-metallic 
minerals, and coal. Intermodal traffic continued to im-
prove. Port contacts reported sustained growth in con-
tainer trade. Truck freight volumes accelerated further 
and increased shipments of rebuilding supplies to Texas 
and Florida contributed to capacity constraints in the 
aftermath of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma. Logistics 
contacts reported that they anticipate considerable year-
over-year increases in e-commerce shipments during the 
holiday season.      
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers, although some contacts faced challenges obtain-
ing financing for long-term residential developments. 
Credit tightened somewhat for energy-related industries. 
Liquidity was plentiful, but some banking contacts report-
ed pressure to increase deposit rates. Some bankers 
noted increased competition for loans.      
Energy  
Overall, energy contacts reported a steady pace of activ-
ity. They noted that the new natural gas pipeline capacity 
that came online was facilitating the demand for export 
of liquid natural gas. Both crude oil and gasoline invento-
ries continued to decrease; however, levels were higher 
than the average range. Contacts reported that industrial 
and commercial utility usage remained flat. Broadly, 
utility contacts indicated they are preparing for a colder 
winter than the previous year.     
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Most of the District remained drought free although parts 
of Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Mississippi were 
classified as abnormally dry or in moderate drought 
conditions. Initial assessments of Hurricane Irma’s dam-
age to Florida’s agriculture industry indicated that citrus 
growers felt the biggest impact; nursery crops, sugar-
cane, vegetable and non-citrus fruit, cattle, and dairy 
also reported losses. Compared to last year, District crop 
production forecasts were up for soybeans, peanuts, 
cotton, and sugarcane, and down for rice and pecans. 
On a year-over-year basis, prices paid to farmers in 
September were up for corn, rice, oranges, broilers, and 
eggs and were down for cotton, soybeans, and beef.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased slightly in October and early November, but contacts expected 
growth to accelerate to a moderate pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment and manufacturing production 
increased modestly, while consumer spending, business spending, and construction and real estate activity increased 
slightly. Wages rose modestly and prices rose slightly. Financial conditions were little changed. Crop yields were below 
last year’s record. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest pace over 
the reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue 
at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Contacts con-
tinued to indicate that the labor market was tight and 
reported difficulty filling positions at all skill levels. A 
manufacturing firm reported turning down business 
because it was unable to find qualified workers. To ad-
dress the challenge of finding qualified workers, firms 
reported that they were raising compensation, increasing 
advertising for positions, and training less-qualified new 
hires. Hiring was focused on professional and technical, 
sales, and production workers. That said, a staffing firm 
that primarily supplies manufacturers with production 
workers reported little change in billable hours. Wage 
growth remained modest overall. Contacts raising wages 
were more likely to do so for select roles than for all 
workers. Wage increases were more prevalent for pro-
fessional and technical, sales, and production workers. 
There was also a notable increase in the number of firms 
reporting wage increases for management positions.   
Prices  
Overall, prices increased slightly in October and early 
November. Retail prices were little changed for most 
categories of spending. A number of contacts again 
reported increases in costs for raw materials, particularly 
construction materials. Most firms reported rising bene-
fits costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased slightly over the reporting 
period. Non-auto retail sales were up slightly, with gains 
reported in the furniture, electronics, entertainment, and 
food and beverage sectors, but declines reported in the 
apparel sector. A contact noted that Halloween sales 
were stronger than expected and that this was a positive 
indicator for the holiday season. New light vehicle sales 
in the District moved down. One dealer indicated that the 
decline was concentrated in the high-end segment. Used 
vehicle sales were little changed. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in October and 
early November. Retail and manufacturing contacts 
indicated that inventories were generally at comfortable 
levels. Capital spending increased slightly, and contacts 
expected spending to increase modestly over the next 
six to twelve months. Outlays were primarily for replacing 
industrial and IT equipment and for renovating struc-
tures, though there was again an increase in the number 
of contacts reporting spending for capacity expansion. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

G-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
Demand for residential, commercial, and industrial ener-
gy was flat, as a slight increase in the number of com-
mercial hook-ups was offset by improvements in custom-
ers’ energy efficiency. Demand for transportation ser-
vices increased moderately. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly on 
balance over the reporting period. Residential construc-
tion edged higher. In the low-priced single-family seg-
ment, contacts indicated that few large-scale develop-
ments were in progress, and that only large developers 
with good credit were undertaking these projects. Home 
sales were flat in recent weeks as low inventory levels in 
the starter home segment continued to constrain sales. 
There were reports that starter homes were receiving 
multiple offers and closing well above asking prices. In 
contrast, sales of high-priced homes lagged. Home 
prices edged higher overall, but varied by price level: 
prices increased noticeably for homes under $250,000, 
modestly for homes between $250,000 and $500,000, 
and were down slightly for homes over $500,000. Non-
residential construction increased slightly, with growth 
spread across market segments. Commercial real estate 
activity also increased slightly and was at a strong level. 
That said, demand for large brick and mortar retail space 
continued to fall from an already low point. Commercial 
rents and vacancy rates edged lower, but the availability 
of sublease space edged higher.  
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production continued at a mod-
est pace in October and early November. Activity in the 
auto and aerospace sectors picked up slightly. Steel 
production was little changed but remained at a healthy 
level. Demand for heavy machinery increased steadily, 
with growth spread across the construction, mining, and 
utilities sectors. One contact indicated that exports to 
Canada were artificially high as stricter regulations on 
emissions that begin in 2018 pulled sales into late 2017. 
Order books for specialty metals manufacturers in-
creased modestly, with growth spread across a wide 
variety of sectors. Manufacturers of construction materi-
als continued to report slow but steady increases in 
shipments, in line with the pace of improvement in con-
struction.  
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Market participants noted that vola-
tility continued to be low. Business loan volume was flat 
and loan quality was unchanged. Consumer loan volume 
was also little changed on balance. Demand for both 
home and auto loans edged down, with contacts noting 
an uptick in delinquencies in auto loan payments. An 
auto dealer reported that credit had tightened noticeably 
for buyers with credit scores at the lower end of the 
subprime category. Credit card volume increased slightly 
and quality was unchanged. 
Agriculture 
Crop yields in the District were below last year’s record. 
Widespread rains slowed the harvest, but helped areas 
that had been experiencing drought conditions. With 
both corn and soybean prices lower than a year ago, 
farm revenues were expected to be down. Contacts 
indicated that some crop operations would be unable to 
cover their expenses, which led to a deterioration in 
agricultural credit conditions and spurred sales of assets 
to cover losses. In some cases, higher livestock income 
helped offset crop losses. Hog and cattle prices moved 
up during the reporting period, leading to plans for ex-
panded production. Milk prices were lower, but cheese 
prices stayed high. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions in the District have improved at a modest pace since our previous report. Labor market conditions 
remain tight as most firms reported raising starting wages and salaries as a way to attract new workers. Reports on 
consumer spending were somewhat weak, and reports from other nonfinancial service firms were mixed. Manufacturing 
contacts reported slight growth, and banking conditions improved moderately. The outlook among District firms sur-
veyed in mid-November was generally optimistic. On net, 49 percent of contacts expect District economic conditions in 
2018 to be better or somewhat better than 2017. This outlook was slightly weaker than the outlook from the mid-August 
survey, but it is a modest improvement from the outlook one year ago.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased modestly since the previous 
report. Of the business contacts surveyed in early No-
vember, on net, one-third of contacts reported that em-
ployment was higher or slightly higher than a year ago. 
Of those hiring, over half expect to increase their firm’s 
employment over the next year, while 40 percent expect 
to hire only to replace departing workers. Contacts cited 
growth of sales, a need for skills not possessed by their 
current staff, and overworked staff as the top factors for 
hiring. Contacts cited an inability to find workers with the 
required skills as a key factor restraining hiring plans, 
behind only a desire to keep operating costs low.  
Contacts have reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report, as tightness in the labor market has 
resulted in upward pressure on wages. On net, 61 per-
cent of contacts reported wages were higher or slightly 
higher than a year ago, and 68 percent reported increas-
es in labor costs. Nearly 80 percent of those hiring re-
ported raising starting wages or salaries to attract new 
hires, while about two-thirds reported raising wages or 
salaries to retain existing employees. 
Prices  
Price pressures have continued to increase modestly. 
Overall, prices charged to consumers increased slightly, 
but the pace of growth slowed during the fourth quarter. 
On net, 15 percent of business contacts reported that 
prices charged to customers were higher than a year 
ago. Conversely, growth in non-labor costs was moder-
ate. On net, 45 percent of contacts reported that costs 
were higher than a year ago. 
Multiple contacts in Louisville reported rising construction 
costs, and a Memphis contact noted a significant in-
crease in lumber prices. In the energy sector, coal prices 
increased moderately. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate consumer spending has slightly declined 
since our previous report. Although October real sales 
tax collections increased in Kentucky and Tennessee, 
they decreased in Missouri and Arkansas. Multiple auto 
dealers reported a decline in sales, which have failed to 
meet their expectations during 2017. Memphis and Lou-
isville dealers noted a shift in demand away from used 
vehicles. Reports from hospitality contacts were mixed. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased slightly since our 
previous report, although the pace of growth has contin-
ued to slow. In a recent survey, contacts reported that 
production and capacity utilization were unchanged in 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
the fourth quarter relative to one year ago, while a slight 
majority on net reported an increase in new orders. The 
results are down from this time last year, when over half 
of contacts on net reported increases in production and 
capacity utilization and over one-fourth reported increas-
es in new orders. Contacts are also less optimistic about 
the next quarter, with only around 10 percent on net 
expecting increases in production, capacity utilization, 
and new orders, compared with over three-fourths ex-
pecting increases in all three areas at this time last year. 
Despite the weaker outlook, several companies reported 
new capital expenditure and facility expansion plans, 
including firms that manufacture transportation equip-
ment and food products. In addition, some contacts 
reported supply disruptions as a result of hurricanes, and 
other contacts expressed concern about a slowdown in 
the auto industry. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Conditions in the service sector weakened from the 
previous period, but remain positive on net. Reports of 
fourth-quarter sales were mixed. About one-third of 
contacts reported higher dollar sales in the current quar-
ter than this time last year; however, one-third reported 
lower dollar sales. Despite mixed sales reports, about 
two-thirds of transportation and service contacts reported 
that sales met or exceeded expectations. Over half of 
contacts expect sales to be higher in the next quarter 
than they were last year. Firms that provide information 
technology services reported plans to expand facilities 
and hire employees. Reports from the healthcare sector 
indicate modest growth since the previous period. 
Healthcare contacts report that heightened uncertainty 
surrounding policy decisions over the past year has 
become an operating norm, and some providers are 
moving forward with small capital expansions.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has remained unchanged 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for September were flat relative to the previous 
month across the District’s four largest MSAs. Local 
contacts continued to report that shortages in inventory 
have hindered sales; on net, about one-quarter of con-
tacts reported that sales have fallen short of expecta-
tions halfway through the fourth quarter. 
Residential construction activity improved modestly. 
September permit activity increased moderately relative 
to the prior month. However, few contacts indicated that 
construction activity has increased compared with a year 
ago. Local contacts continued to report that a shortage 
of labor is preventing homebuilders from meeting    
demand.  
Commercial real estate activity has improved modestly 
since the previous report. Contacts reported relatively 
strong demand for most property types, particularly office 
and industrial. These trends are expected to continue 
into the first quarter of 2018. 
Commercial construction activity remained flat. Several 
Memphis contractors continued to report optimism re-
garding future projects. New multifamily construction 
continued, and contacts indicated that the level of activity 
has been the same relative to a year ago. New hotel 
development also continued in the major MSAs. Similar 
to residential markets, contacts reported labor shortages 
negatively impacting activity. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions have improved at a moderate pace 
since the previous report. Banking contacts reported 
overall loan demand increased moderately relative to 
last year; however, the pace of loan growth continues to 
steadily slow. Demand for auto loans declined for a 
second straight quarter, though bankers anticipate that 
auto lending standards could loosen modestly next quar-
ter. Mortgage demand expanded at the fastest rate 
among major loan categories, while demand for busi-
ness lending was unchanged relative to year-ago levels. 
After trending up the past few quarters, delinquencies 
declined moderately across all loan types. District banks 
are expanding the geographic market areas they serve 
as competitive pressures from other lenders continue to 
increase. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agriculture conditions have improved moderately since 
the previous reporting period, although farmers continue 
to struggle with low crop prices. Expected yields for corn, 
cotton, rice, and soybeans were all higher in mid-
November than they were in mid-October. The mid-
November expectations were also higher than realized 
levels in 2016. Expected corn yields saw the largest 
improvement, with November expectations 3 percent 
above October expectations. Contacts concurred with 
the projections for all four crops, noting that there will be 
record yields in a lot of areas.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined slightly 
from September to October, with seasonally adjusted 
production declining a half a percent. October production 
was also down 3 percent from a year ago. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew modestly, with solid hiring 
demand dampened by tight labor. Wage and price pressures were both moderate. The District economy showed vary-
ing growth in consumer spending, services, residential construction, commercial and residential real estate, manufactur-
ing, energy, and mining. But commercial construction dipped slightly, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew modestly since the last report. Hiring 
demand remained solid overall. Two employers in 
western Wisconsin announced immediate hiring of 100 
workers. A regional health system with facilities in 
multiple District states noted that it had 1,100 regular 
openings. October online job openings in North Dakota 
were flat compared with a year earlier, but that was a 
notable improvement compared with the previous six 
months. Two separate surveys showed that hiring 
sentiment in South Dakota turned modestly positive in 
October after months of negative sentiment, and 
sentiment in Minnesota and North Dakota remained 
positive. Labor markets remained tight. District initial 
unemployment claims in October were 17 percent lower 
than a year earlier. A southern Minnesota manufacturer 
had 100 openings and could open two more lines of 
production “but can’t find workers,” according to a local 
contact. Figures from Montana Jobs Services showed 
that active job seekers there were roughly one-third 
lower in October than a year earlier. A Minnesota staffing 
contact said current hiring demand was 5 percent higher 
than last year, but turnover remained high, and “we 
continue to see fewer candidates.” However, there were 
notable signs of softness in some regional markets. In 
Minnesota, a printing plant, a papermaker, and a food 
processor all announced plant closures, including layoffs 
of 335, 150, and 200, respectively.  
Wages rose moderately overall since the last report, 
though accounts varied. A Minneapolis-St. Paul staffing 
contact said his firm was seeing “a ton of wage pressure 
this year,” with increases of 5 percent to 7 percent. A 
small ad hoc survey of Minnesota firms found that wages 
were expected to rise 2 percent to 3 percent in the 
coming year. A Montana contact said employers “across 
the board” were raising wages to attract employees. A 
North Dakota workforce source said wages there were 
“trickling up.” A rural Wisconsin banker noted that tight 
labor was pushing up starting wages, but longer-term 
employees were seeing smaller increases similar to 
previous years. A northern Minnesota firm said it was 
freezing wages after a poor quarter.   
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate since the last report. 
Building materials prices have increased steeply in 
recent months, according to several industry sources, in 
part due to the impact of post-hurricane rebuilding. Retail 
fuel prices in District states as of mid-November were 
slightly higher than the previous reporting period. A 
recent forecast of home heating costs for the coming 
winter projected natural gas prices to increase 2 percent 
over last year, while heating oil costs were expected to 
rise 10 percent. Prices received by farmers for corn, 
wheat, hay, milk, hogs, chickens, and eggs increased in 
September compared with a year earlier; prices for 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
soybeans, cattle, and turkeys decreased.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending showed modest growth since the 
last report. Despite the closure of four large discount/
department stores across the District, the retail sector in 
many District metros saw expansion and was 
experiencing low vacancy rates. Year-over-year gross 
sales in South Dakota in September and October turned 
positive after six consecutive months of decline. A 
November survey found that Minnesota shoppers 
expected their holiday spending to increase by 3.5 
percent over last year.  
Hunting dominates fall tourism in much of the District, 
and reports varied. South Dakota saw a decline in 
pheasant hunters, thanks largely to low pheasant 
numbers stemming from severe drought in the state. 
Deer licenses in North Dakota were up slightly from last 
year, but down about 2 percent in Minnesota. Hunters in 
northwestern and south-central parts of Montana were 
also down from last year, due in part to wildfires. A 
survey in Montana found that one-quarter of Montana 
tourism businesses, and 13 percent of outfitters and 
guides, had to cancel an event due to this year’s 
wildfires.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. An accounting firm with 
business across the District reported steady growth 
recently. A contact in the financial services industry 
noted an increase in start-up activity, particularly among 
information technology and biotech firms. However, a 
web marketing company was cutting staff amid 
restructuring.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was down slightly since the last 
report. A slow September was followed by a flat October 
across most of the District, according to industry figures 
on construction spending. Commercial permitting activity 
in October was mixed among District metros, and a 
count of new and active construction projects also 
declined over the most recent six-week period (ending in 
early November) compared with a year earlier. The 
construction outlook received a boost in several District 
states from strong referendum results for school 
improvements, including $1.3 billion in capital bonding in 
Minnesota. Residential construction was up moderately. 
Permitted single-family units in October rose in a number 
of metros, while multifamily units saw a notable uptick in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul. 
Commercial real estate grew modestly since the last 
report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, industrial leasing activity 
has been strong, pushing vacancy rates below 7 
percent. Industrial projects planned or under construction 
were also described as healthy, though below last year’s 
levels. Office vacancy rates, on the other hand, have 
seen an uptick this year, and lease concessions have 
started to appear. Demand for retail space continued, 
with vacancy rates remaining steady and asking rents 
rising modestly. Residential real estate was modestly 
higher. October home sales grew compared with a year 
earlier in Bozeman and Missoula (Mont.) and in western 
and northern Wisconsin. Sales also grew slightly in 
Minnesota. But decreased sales were seen in Great 
Falls and Helena (Mont.) and Sioux Falls, S.D.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An ad hoc survey of Minneapolis-
St. Paul inventory managers indicated that recent 
business activity had increased relative to the same 
period a year ago and that sales for the remainder of the 
year were expected to accelerate. An index of 
manufacturing conditions indicated increased activity in 
October compared with a month earlier in Minnesota and 
the Dakotas. A radiator plant in Minnesota and a 
furniture producer in Wisconsin announced expansions. 
In contrast, a paper producer shut down a production 
line at a mill in Minnesota.  
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak overall, as 
good harvests were not expected to offset low prices. 
Early reports from harvests indicated solid production in 
District states, though corn and soybean production in 
the Dakotas was expected to decrease from last year. 
Respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s third-quarter 
(October) survey of agricultural credit conditions 
indicated that farm income and capital spending 
decreased relative to a year earlier, with further declines 
expected for the remainder of the year. Activity in the 
energy and mining sectors increased moderately since 
the last report. District oil and gas exploration as of mid-
November was up slightly from a month earlier, though 
North Dakota recently approved or renewed a 
substantial number of drilling permits. September 
shipments of iron ore on the Great Lakes increased 23 
percent from a year earlier.  ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased moderately in October and early November, and most sectors expected 
continued moderate growth in future months. Transportation and manufacturing contacts reported a strong increase in 
activity, and professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade activity expanded at a moderate pace. District real estate 
activity continued to increase at a slight pace, while consumer spending contacts indicated growth was unchanged since 
the previous survey period. District energy activity continued to grow modestly and bankers reported steady overall loan 
demand, stable deposit levels, and unchanged loan quality. Agricultural conditions weakened but at a slower pace, with 
subdued farm income and lower farmland values in most areas. Employment and employee hours increased in most 
sectors, and contacts reported modest wage growth with further moderate increases expected. Input and selling prices 
were up moderately over the previous survey period in most sectors.  
Employment and Wages  
Respondents in the wholesale trade, professional ser-
vices, real estate, and manufacturing sectors reported an 
increase in employment, while respondents in the auto 
industry noted a slight decline. A significant majority of 
respondents in the District expected either increasing or 
unchanged employment levels in the next twelve 
months, due primarily to higher expectations of sales 
growth. Contacts in the manufacturing sector and most 
of the services sector with the exception of the auto 
industry reported rising employee hours. Respondents 
noted a shortage of commercial drivers, skilled techni-
cians, and service workers. The primary factors cited as 
restraining hiring plans were a desire to keep operating 
costs low followed by the lack of available qualified 
workers.    
Contacts in most sectors reported modest wage growth 
and expectations were for moderate wage growth in the 
coming months. Additionally, the majority of District 
contacts noted rising wages for both new and existing 
employees. 
Prices  
Overall, input prices were up moderately compared to 
the prior survey period, and selling prices also increased 
at a moderate pace. Respondents in the retail sector 
reported moderately higher input and selling prices, with 
both expected to rise strongly moving forward. Restau-
rant input prices increased moderately, while selling 
prices edged up. Transportation contacts reported mod-
erate growth in both input and selling prices and antici-
pated strong increases in the coming months. Construc-
tion prices continued to increase at a moderate pace 
with modest increases expected in the next few months. 
Manufacturers reported a slight increase in prices for 
finished goods, while raw material costs continued to 
edge higher. Manufacturers anticipated moderate growth 
in both finished goods and raw materials prices over the 
next few months.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity was mostly flat in October 
and early November, while expectations for future 
growth increased at a moderate pace. Retail sales in-
creased moderately over the previous survey period, and 
remained above year-ago levels. Several retailers noted 
an increase in sales for lower priced and discounted 
items, while higher-priced products sold poorly. Contacts 
anticipated sales to rise considerably in the next few 
months, and inventory levels were expected to increase 
moderately. Auto sales continued to fall moderately and 
were well below year-ago levels. Dealer contacts antici-
pated a moderate pickup in sales for the months ahead. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Auto inventories were expected to remain stable heading 
forward. Restaurant sales increased slightly and were 
modestly above year-ago levels. Contacts expected a 
mild decline in activity heading forward. District tourism 
activity was slightly lower than the previous survey and 
below year-ago levels. Tourism contacts expected activi-
ty to increase moderately heading into the winter 
months.  
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded at a strong pace in 
October and early November, and the majority of other 
business contacts reported moderate to strong sales 
increases. Manufacturers reported sustained growth in 
production, particularly for metals, plastics, and electron-
ics products. Shipments, new orders, and order backlog 
grew at a solid pace, and activity was higher than a year 
ago. Manufacturers’ capital spending plans rose moder-
ately, and firms’ expectations for future activity remained 
favorable.   
Outside of manufacturing, transportation firms reported 
strong sales increases, while professional, high-tech, 
and wholesale trade contacts indicated more moderate 
growth. All firms expected a strong improvement in sales 
in the next six months. Professional, high-tech, and 
wholesale trade firms reported modest growth in capital 
spending plans, while transportation firms anticipated a 
moderate decrease in capital expenditures heading 
forward. 
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity continued to expand at a slight 
pace in October and early November. Residential home 
sales remained steady since the previous survey period, 
but expectations for home sales were modestly negative 
in the coming months. Sales of low- and medium-priced 
homes continued to outpace sales of higher-priced 
homes. Residential home prices rose modestly, while 
inventories fell further. Residential construction activity 
edged up, as construction supply sales increased mod-
estly while new home starts were flat and traffic of poten-
tial buyers fell moderately. Commercial real estate activi-
ty continued to expand at a modest pace as absorption, 
completions, and sales rose, while vacancy rates de-
clined. Activity in the commercial real estate sector was 
moderately above year-ago levels, and expectations 
were positive moving forward. 
Banking 
Bankers reported steady overall loan demand for the 
month of October.  A majority of respondents indicated a 
stable demand for commercial and industrial, commer-
cial real estate, residential real estate, agricultural and 
consumer installment loans. Most bankers indicated loan 
quality was unchanged compared to a year ago. In addi-
tion, most respondents expected loan quality to remain 
essentially the same over the next six months. Credit 
standards remained largely unchanged in all major loan 
categories. Finally, results for the trends in deposits were 
varied with no discernible majority.  
Energy 
Tenth District energy activity continued to grow modestly 
and expectations for future activity were positive. The 
number of active oil and gas rigs moderated somewhat, 
particularly oil rigs in Oklahoma. Still, oil and gas produc-
tion was expected to increase since most drilling activity 
focused on development rather than exploration. Activity 
picked up modestly in New Mexico’s San Juan Basin 
and Colorado’s Denver-Julesburg Basin. Activity in Okla-
homa’s Arkoma basin, a predominately natural gas play, 
also expanded modestly since the last survey period. 
Respondents continued to focus on operating within 
cash flows, but said private equity capital remained 
readily available. 
Agriculture 
The District farm economy and credit conditions contin-
ued to weaken since the previous reporting period, but 
the pace of the declines slowed. Farm income remained 
weak in November, which continued to reduce working 
capital and increase demand for financing. Farm loan 
repayment rates also generally declined, but at a more 
moderate pace than in the previous reporting period. 
District contacts reported that stronger livestock markets 
and expectations of a strong fall harvest kept loan repay-
ment rates from declining more sharply. Farmland values 
also moderated further in most areas, but remained 
steady in areas where crop production was particularly 
high. District contacts noted that credit monitoring has 
increased slightly and interest rates on farm loans have 
edged higher alongside the elevated risk in the sector. 
However, most contacts expected only minimal sales of 
farm assets to improve cash flow and working capital. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy continued to expand at a moderate pace over the past six weeks. Manufacturing output 
strengthened, and activity in nonfinancial services increased. Retail sales growth continued but at a slower pace as the 
post-hurricane auto sales rush abated somewhat. Home sales rose during the reporting period. Loan demand was flat, 
and energy activity was largely unchanged. Crop conditions remained mostly favorable. Employment, wages and prices 
continued to increase, and widespread reports of a tight labor market persisted. Outlooks remained positive overall, and 
generally a bit more optimistic than in the prior reporting period. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment growth remained solid, and upward 
wage pressure persisted at slightly elevated levels. 
Hiring picked up in the service sector, continued at about 
the same robust pace in manufacturing, and abated 
slightly in the energy sector. Labor market tightness 
carried on in most industries. Worker shortages were 
reported throughout the oil and gas supply chain and in 
construction, with contacts saying the scarcity of labor 
was driving up wages for certain types of workers. Simi-
lar reports came from manufacturing (particularly high-
tech), airlines, and health care. Some banks reported 
that labor was becoming a bigger issue than regulatory 
compliance. Looking ahead, roughly two-thirds of con-
tacts expect to increase employment over the next 
twelve months, largely citing an expectation of high sales 
growth as the impetus. Several firms said that the inabil-
ity to find workers with the required skills was the main 
restraint for hiring plans. 
Prices 
Pressure on selling prices remained elevated over the 
past six weeks. A pickup in price growth was noted 
among nonfinancial services, retail and construction 
firms. However, an airline noted falling ticket prices due 
to increased competition. New home prices were mostly 
flat, with some builders offering discounts and/or incen-
tives on higher-end houses due to push back from buy-
ers at that price point. Oil and diesel prices rose over the 
reporting period, while gasoline prices exhibited mixed 
movements—falling from post-hurricane highs then 
rebounding in early November.  
Manufacturing  
There was further pickup in the robust expansion in the 
manufacturing sector. A rebound in output growth for 
nondurable goods was seen in October, driven largely by 
chemical and food production. Strength continued in 
durable goods manufacturing, led by increases in    
transportation equipment production. Output growth 
among firms closely tied to energy was weaker than 
overall manufacturing in October. While refinery and 
chemical plants were largely back to normal operating 
rates after Hurricane Harvey, contacts said the storm 
caused a setback of one to two quarters of construction 
time for new facilities along the Gulf Coast. Refining 
margins were healthy, and sentiment was bullish through 
next year. For Texas manufacturing overall, growth in 
new orders picked up and outlooks remained highly 
positive. 
 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Retail sales continued to expand, albeit at a slower pace 
than in the prior reporting period. Auto sales decreased 
from the initial post-hurricane surge but remained high. A 
clothing retailer noted that Houston-area stores benefited 
from the Astros playoff and World Series excitement, as 
well as some additional spending by flood victims. Along 
the border, several contacts noted ongoing concerns 
regarding a decline in demand for American goods by 
Mexican customers. Outlooks among retailers in general 
remained quite positive. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services continued to expand 
moderately over the past six weeks. There were scat-
tered reports of lingering effects from Hurricane Harvey, 
but for the most part business had returned to normal. 
Transportation services were a key driver of faster 
growth this period. Rail cargo volumes were up, particu-
larly for frac sand and building products. Volumes for air 
cargo as well as containers and trailers also rose. Staff-
ing services firms noted increased demand and broad-
based strength. In North Texas, logistics, manufacturing, 
health care, call centers, and IT exhibited particularly 
strong demand for placements. Revenues in the leisure 
and hospitality sector rebounded in October after declin-
ing in the wake of Hurricane Harvey in September, but 
there were some businesses still recovering. Overall, 
outlooks were optimistic and improved from six weeks 
ago, although concerns remained. Some contacts noted 
that uncertainty surrounding federal tax reform, health 
care, and government regulation was making it difficult to 
plan for 2018. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose during the reporting period, although 
the pace of growth varied across regions. Contacts in 
Houston generally noted a rebound in sales activity 
following Hurricane Harvey, but there were some reports 
of weakness in areas affected by flooding. Respondents 
in Austin and Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) reported slowing 
in the pace of sales growth, which some contacts in 
DFW attributed to buyers concerned about changes to 
immigration policy. 
The apartment market was slowly returning to a normal 
pace of growth following a few years of above-average 
expansion, according to contacts. While overall condi-
tions have improved in Houston’s apartment market 
following Hurricane Harvey, one contact said rent con-
cessions have slowly started to creep back in some 
areas where there is a plethora of new supply.   
The office market remained mostly weak in Houston, 
despite a decline in sublease inventory and a pickup in 
investment sales activity. Office demand was solid in 
Dallas, and industrial market activity was reported to be 
stable in both metros. 
Financial Services 
Demand for loans was flat over the past six weeks. 
According to contacts, loan volumes increased, but the 
pace of growth continued its downward trend over the 
past three reporting periods. The slowdown in loan vol-
ume growth was seen in commercial and residential real 
estate, while commercial and industrial loan growth 
edged up. Contacts again reported a slight decline in 
consumer loan volumes. Core deposit volumes in-
creased, as did interest rates paid on them. Financial 
industry contacts noted improvement in general business 
activity over the past six weeks, and also expressed 
higher levels of optimism for the six-months-ahead  
horizon. 
Energy 
Energy activity was largely unchanged from six weeks 
ago, despite an increase in oil prices. Drilling activity 
declined as the Texas rig count fell, but well completion 
and production activities increased. Demand for oilfield 
services in the Permian Basin remained healthy, and 
declining activity outside the Permian Basin may stabi-
lize with the stronger oil prices, according to contacts. 
Outlooks for 2018 remained conservative, but were more 
optimistic than the last reporting period.  
Agriculture 
Crop harvesting continued at a normal pace, with gener-
ally favorable crop conditions. An estimate from Texas 
A&M University puts agricultural losses from Hurricane 
Harvey at $200 million, which is not as high as expected 
and far less than what was seen from Hurricane Ike in 
2008 and Hurricane Irma. Texas corn and sorghum 
production is expected to be down in 2017 largely be-
cause of fewer acres planted, while cotton production is 
expected to be up more than 10 percent this year, ac-
cording to the USDA. There was still financial stress in 
the farming sector, with producers primarily concerned 
about low crop prices across the board. On the livestock 
side, pasture conditions were fair to good and cattle 
prices increased sharply over the last six weeks largely 
in response to strong domestic demand and booming 
exports. ■ 
  
 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of October 
through mid-November. Overall price inflation was flat. Conditions in the labor market tightened further, and upward 
wage pressures intensified. Sales of retail goods grew moderately, and growth in the consumer and business services 
sectors remained strong. Conditions in the manufacturing sector remained solid, and activity in the agriculture sector 
was flat. Contacts reported that residential real estate market activity remained robust and conditions in the commercial 
real estate sector were strong. Lending activity grew at a moderate pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market tightened further, and 
upward wage pressures intensified. Shortages of skilled 
IT professionals in the technology, financial services, 
and manufacturing industries further intensified upward 
wage pressures. Wages in the construction industry 
climbed higher as post-hurricane rebuilding efforts in the 
Southeast worsened existing labor shortages. Contacts 
in the Mountain West observed very low unemployment 
levels in nearly every industry. Producers of manufac-
tured pharmaceuticals reported intensified competition 
for new hires, increasing wage pressures notably. Major 
film releases during the holiday season and preparation 
for the upcoming awards season are expected to boost 
seasonal employment in the entertainment and related 
industries. Demand for labor in the commercial airline 
industry declined somewhat as manufacturers reported a 
slowdown in new orders. 
Prices  
Overall, price inflation was flat over the reporting period. 
Prices for some building materials jumped as reconstruc-
tion efforts in the Southeast pushed up demand sharply. 
Airfare inflation picked up modestly due to a jump in fuel 
prices. Prices for transportation services are expected to 
increase over the holiday season as a large transporta-
tion company is expected to institute a holiday sur-
charge. Except for all but a small number of niche prod-
ucts, price growth for apparel was flat. Increased compe-
tition in the retail pharmaceutical industry slowed overall 
drug price growth, and contacts continued to report 
modest deflation in generic drug prices. Continued 
strong production slowed price growth for many agricul-
tural commodities. Prices of mobile devices continued to 
decline on a 12-month basis. 
Retail Trade and Services 
Growth in retail sales remained moderate over the re-
porting period. Sales of beverage products were strong, 
and contacts noted a shift in consumer preference to-
wards smaller noncarbonated beverages. While e-
commerce sales growth in the apparel industry contin-
ued to outpace sales declines at brick-and-mortar retail-
ers, contacts noted that overall sales remain weak, given 
the favorable overall economic conditions.  
On balance, holiday sales are expected to increase 
modestly relative to last year’s holiday season due in 
part to an extra shopping day between Thanksgiving and 
Christmas. However, some industry surveys suggested 
there will be less in-store foot traffic on Black Friday this 
year as consumers have become accustomed to year-
round discounting. Holiday sales of technology products 
are expected to increase relative to last year. Automobile 
sales during the holiday season are expected to be solid, 
but down from last year’s strong pace. Elevated invento-
ries and soft demand are expected to fuel strong dis-
counting at apparel retailers during the holiday sales 
season. 
The Beige Book ■ November 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
continued to grow at a strong pace. Demand for air travel 
reached its highest level in a decade, and revenue 
growth in the industry remained strong. Sales of technol-
ogy services picked up as demand for cloud computing 
and security software remained robust, and infrastruc-
ture investment in data centers ramped up further. Wild-
fires in Northern California temporarily reduced shipping 
volumes in the region. However, shipping volumes are 
expected to increase to record levels during the holiday 
season, and contacts reported increased investment in 
automated warehouse technology to meet peak demand. 
After declines in the early fall, same-store sales in the 
restaurant industry have picked up modestly.  
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector remained solid. 
Demand for semiconductors continued to be strong. 
Production of steel and manufactured metals picked up 
further, and rebuilding efforts in the Southeast are ex-
pected to buoy normally soft year-end sales. However, 
capacity utilization rates in the steel sector remained 
below long-run levels. Deliveries of commercial aircraft 
reached peak levels, but new orders slowed somewhat. 
Production of manufactured pharmaceuticals slowed 
somewhat from its pace over the first half of the year.   
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
On balance, activity in the agriculture sector was flat. 
Exports of some processed manufactured milk products 
were strong. Excess supply of wheat put downward 
pressure on prices and hampered profitability of growers 
in Eastern Washington. Harvest yields of potatoes in 
Idaho were slightly below long-run averages. Contacts 
emphasized that energy producers focused capital in-
vestments on improving existing infrastructure. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets picked up to a robust 
pace. Construction activity in the residential market 
remained robust and was slowed only by shortages of 
land and labor. Low inventory levels and strong demand 
pushed up house prices and rents. Contacts reported 
that affordability remained a concern as price increases 
continued to outpace wage growth in much of the Dis-
trict. Commercial construction activity picked up to a 
strong pace. Contacts in Seattle noted continued strong 
demand for commercial office space, driven mainly by 
demand from large technology companies. Permits for 
commercial storage space are expected to surge in 
Eastern Washington and Idaho. Over the next 10 years, 
contacts expect that a significant number of large retail 
spaces will be repurposed for storage. 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew at a moderate pace over the re-
porting period. Loan demand remained moderate. De-
mand for deposits outpaced growth, pushing up deposit 
rates. Loan underwriting standards softened slightly. 
Delinquencies remained low, but contacts in some rural 
areas noted an uptick in nonperforming loans. Contacts 
reported that regulatory compliance continued to push 
up overall costs, particularly for community banks. ■ 


