The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
January 16, 2019 
January 2019 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
based on information collected on or before January 7, 2019. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity increased in most of the U.S., with eight of twelve Federal Reserve Districts reporting modest to 
moderate growth. Nonauto retail sales grew modestly, as several Districts reported more holiday traffic compared with 
last year. Auto sales were flat on balance. The majority of Districts indicated that manufacturing expanded, but that 
growth had slowed, particularly in the auto and energy sectors. New home construction and existing home sales were 
little changed, with several Districts reporting that sales were limited by rising prices and low inventory. Commercial 
real estate activity was also little changed on balance. Most Districts reported modest to moderate growth in activity in 
the nonfinancial services sector, though a few Districts noted that growth there had slowed. The energy sector expand-
ed at a slower pace, and lower energy prices contributed to a pullback in the industry’s capital spending expectations. 
The agriculture sector struggled as prices generally remained low despite recent increases. Overall, lending volumes 
grew modestly, though a few Districts noted that growth had slowed. Outlooks generally remained positive, but many 
Districts reported that contacts had become less optimistic in response to increased financial market volatility, rising 
short-term interest rates, falling energy prices, and elevated trade and political uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment increased in most of the country, with a plurality of Districts reporting modest growth. All Districts noted 
that labor markets were tight and that firms were struggling to find workers at any skill level. Minneapolis indicated that 
construction firms had turned down business because they could not find workers, and Atlanta reported that a few 
contacts were either actively overstaffing or retaining employees through lulls in demand in anticipation of future 
growth. Wages grew throughout the country, with the majority of Districts reporting moderate gains. Wages increased 
across skill levels, and numerous Districts highlighted rising entry-level wages as firms sought to attract and retain 
workers and as new minimum wage laws came into effect.  
Prices 
The majority of Districts reported modest to moderate increases in prices. Most Districts indicated that firms’ input costs 
had risen, but reports were mixed on whether they could pass the higher costs on to customers. Reports often cited 
rising materials and freight prices as sources of cost increases, and a number of Districts said that higher tariffs were 
also a factor. While prices of most inputs were up, several Districts noted that fuel costs had gone down. A number of 
Districts reported rising home prices, while prices for commercial and industrial space either increased or were flat. 
Prices for agricultural commodities were generally somewhat higher. 
Boston 
Business contacts reported continued year-over-year 
growth in revenues even as they cited signs of a some-
what slower pace. Selected labor markets (occupations, 
locations) remained tight and wage increases were 
moderate. Some retailers and manufacturers raised 
selling prices. Most respondents said their outlook was 
positive, although somewhat less certain than earlier.  
 
New York 
Regional economic activity leveled off in the latest re-
porting period, while labor markets remained tight and 
wage growth picked up somewhat. Input costs and sell-
ing prices rose at a steady pace. Holiday season sales 
were a bit on the sluggish side but still up from a year 
ago. Tourism remained brisk, but most other sectors saw 
activity flatten out or decline slightly. Banks reported a 
dip in loan demand. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity maintained a modest pace of growth, 
although further slowing occurred among service sectors 
and some real estate activity declined. Lack of qualified 
labor continued to constrain hiring and raise wage pres-
sures. Price increases remained modest. Nevertheless, 
firms remained generally positive about the six-month 
outlook.  
Cleveland 
Economic activity in the Fourth District increased slightly. 
Hiring increased at a moderate pace. Upward pressure 
on costs and selling prices continued. Retailers reported 
slightly increased demand. Manufacturing and banking 
contacts noted a seasonal slowdown. Nonresidential 
construction continued to be strong and housing demand 
stabilized. Professional services firms reported increased 
activity driven by demand for information technologies. 
Richmond 
The regional economy expanded at a modest rate, on 
balance, in recent weeks. While many service sector 
industries saw positive growth, manufacturers reported a 
decline in shipments and orders and faced higher input 
costs due to tariffs. Loan demand increased and Fifth 
District ports experienced robust growth. Overall, labor 
demand and wages increased modestly while price 
growth remained moderate.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity improved at a moderate pace. The 
District’s labor market remained tight and wages in-
creased, on average. Nonlabor input costs picked up; 
however, reports of firms’ ability to pass along increases 
were mixed. Holiday sales were solid. Home sales were 
subdued. Manufacturers noted a decrease in new orders 
and production. Bankers noted steady activity.  
Chicago 
Economic activity grew at a modest pace. Employment, 
consumer spending, and business spending increased 
modestly; manufacturing increased slightly; and con-
struction and real estate activity was little changed. 
Wages and prices rose modestly and financial conditions 
deteriorated slightly. Prospects for farm income im-
proved as corn, soybean, and wheat prices moved high-
er. 
St. Louis 
Reports from contacts indicate that economic conditions 
have continued to improve, although the pace of growth 
has slowed since our previous report. District banking 
contacts reported positive but slower growth in loan 
volumes during the fourth quarter.  
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew moderately. Labor 
demand has ebbed slightly but remained healthy overall, 
while labor markets remained very tight. Price pressures 
were modest. District manufacturers indicated that busi-
ness conditions were strong and generally expected to 
continue, with upbeat outlooks for the year to come. 
Holiday retail spending was strong. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity was flat since the previous survey, but 
expectations were generally positive. District agricultural 
conditions remained weak, and activity in the energy 
sector eased slightly as the outlook for oil prices de-
clined. However, retail sales were strongly above year-
ago levels, and manufacturing, wholesale trade, and 
professional and high-tech sectors continued to expand.  
Dallas 
While economic activity remained healthy, growth abated 
to a more modest pace. A broad-based deceleration was 
seen across manufacturing, services, retail, and energy. 
Hiring continued, and widespread labor shortages further 
elevated wages. Price pressures eased slightly. Out-
looks were markedly less optimistic than the previous 
report. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Labor market conditions 
remained tight, and price inflation was flat. Sales of retail 
goods expanded moderately, and activity in the consum-
er and business services sectors was solid. Conditions in 
the manufacturing sector strengthened modestly. Activity 
in real estate markets was solid on balance. Lending 
activity ticked down. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the First District expanded at a modest to moderate pace since the last report, amid some signs of 
slowing growth. Retailers reported moderate increases in sales, and tourist activity was strong. Most manufacturers 
cited increased revenue from a year ago, but some noted the pace of increase was slower recently than earlier in the 
year. Software and information technology services firms also reported moderate revenue and demand growth in the 
closing months of the year. Commercial real estate markets were largely unchanged since the last report. Residential 
real estate markets saw ongoing price increases and mixed sales results; contacts in a couple of markets cited greater 
“balance” as local shortages of housing inventory eased somewhat. While retailers (including an auto dealer) and manu-
facturers said sizable tariff increases would pose significant problems if they occurred and many respondents cited 
uncertainty, outlooks remained mostly positive.  
Employment and Wages  
Many contacts cited selected labor shortages and mod-
erate increases in pay rates at the end of 2018. Retailers 
noted that their labor costs will continue to go up in 2019, 
in part because of state minimum wage increases and 
labor shortages in some markets. On balance, however, 
they said hiring in the retail sector has not been difficult. 
By contrast, a tourism contact noted serious concern 
about ongoing labor shortages on Cape Cod that will be 
more severe in 2019 if limits on the J-1 and H-2B visa 
programs are not raised. Manufacturing contacts did not 
report any significant changes in employment. Some 
cited difficulties finding workers, especially skilled engi-
neers; however, one contact reported that after a 
“market adjustment” raised compensation by 10 percent 
to 15 percent, difficulties in hiring and retention dramati-
cally eased. Software and IT services respondents re-
ported annual wage and compensation increases of 2 
percent to 4 percent, with no changes in average head-
count or turnover rates. 
Prices  
Contacts cited modest to moderate increases in selling 
prices. Retail contacts said they expect to raise their 
selling prices between 1 percent and 4 percent in 2019, 
depending on the inputs for a particular item. In manu-
facturing, pricing pressures were mixed. Input costs were 
generally down due to lower fuel prices. A producer of 
frozen fish said they were able to put through their first 
“full price increase” since 2011 – an across-the-board 5-
percent rise. Most software and IT services contacts said 
there have been no real pricing changes throughout the 
past year, although two contacts mentioned price in-
creases in 2018 and one is looking towards another 
increase in upcoming quarters. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retailers contacted for this round reported that compara-
ble store sales increased by 2.8 percent to 4.0 percent 
year-over-year. All said traffic in their brick-and-mortar 
stores declined by a few percentage points compared to 
2017, but noted that the average in-store purchase was 
up in 2018 (one retailer said by 5 percent). A contact 
with a strong online presence said that a significant rise 
in direct sales made up for the decline in in-store pur-
chases. Retailers expect to see small revenue gains in 
2019 over 2018, with consumer confidence high. 
A contact in the automotive industry in southern New 
England reported that sales were steady but not robust. 
Passenger traffic to Boston’s Logan Airport set a new 
record in 2018; departing flights in December were up 
7.4 percent year-over-year. In 2019 new flight services 
will be added by domestic and international carriers. 
Strong tourist activity was seen on Cape Cod through 
December, as retailers and inns reported having a good 
holiday season. This respondent said that economic 
fundamentals in the United States remain strong, so 
2019 should be a good year for the tourist industry.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Three-quarters of the manufacturing firms contacted this 
cycle reported higher sales year-on-year. One firm with 
lower sales, a chemical company, said that the year-
earlier period was exceptionally strong. Another contact 
attributed the decline to slowing growth in the automotive 
industry around the world. Some contacts said growth 
slowed in the fourth quarter relative to earlier in the year. 
A diversified manufacturer said that customers were 
taking longer to pay bills. On the plus side, two contacts 
said that a shortage of trucking capacity that had been a 
problem in recent years appeared to have eased. Con-
tacts did not report any major revisions to capital ex-
penditure plans.  
Respondents generally expected growth to continue in 
2019, but they expressed significant reservations. Con-
tacts viewed the trade situation as a significant risk fac-
tor. Several contacts noted that the length of the eco-
nomic expansion made a downturn more likely, but none 
pointed to any specific issues with their customers or 
markets.  
Software and Information Technology Services  
Software and IT services firms reported moderate growth 
as the fourth quarter drew to a close. The majority of 
contacts noted revenue growth in the mid-to-high single 
digits year-over-year, with corresponding positive growth 
in product demand as well, both quarter-over-quarter 
and year-over-year. Looking to 2019, all but one contact 
reported a desire to focus more on investing in sales and 
marketing. Overall, contacts expressed wariness about 
the uncertainty they have felt in markets, but noted no 
specific impacts on their individual firms to date.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate markets in the First District 
showed few changes since the last report. Office leasing 
activity remained muted in the Hartford area, maintained 
a moderate pace in both the Providence and Portland 
areas, and stayed strong in the Boston area.  
Contacts in each of those metro areas noted that subur-
ban office demand remains weaker than urban office 
demand. Industrial leasing demand remained very robust 
in the Boston area but continued to soften in Maine and 
in Connecticut. In Rhode Island, low inventory of industri-
al space relative to demand has spurred increased inter-
est in industrial construction, although one contact ex-
pected developers to exercise caution.  
Investment sales demand in Providence strengthened on 
balance in 2018 from 2017, while in Hartford and Port-
land investment sales were described as steady in re-
cent months. Boston’s investment market, while still 
characterized as strong, showed some tentative signs of 
softening, and contacts in that city expressed concerns 
that property values could face downward pressure as 
investors rebalance their portfolios after the recent de-
clines in major stock market indexes. At the same time, 
commercial real estate financing costs remained relative-
ly low as some banks reportedly reduced their interest-
rate spreads on commercial mortgages. The outlook 
remained largely pessimistic for the commercial real 
estate market in Connecticut, while elsewhere in the 
District contacts seemed optimistic for the near term but 
increasingly uncertain about the outlook for late 2019 
and beyond. 
Residential Real Estate 
Contacts reported that First District residential real estate 
markets had a strong finish and a good year overall in 
2018. For single family homes, closed sales were up 
year-over-year from November 2017 to November 2018 
in Rhode Island, Boston, and Maine, and down in Mas-
sachusetts and New Hampshire. (Data are missing for 
Connecticut because of an ongoing technical issue.) For 
condos, closed sales decreased in all reporting areas but 
Rhode Island. Vermont saw a decrease in sales for 
single family homes and condos combined. Median 
sales prices increased generally, with the exception of 
condo markets in Rhode Island and Maine, which report-
ed mild price decreases year-over-year.  
Residential markets in Rhode Island and Boston became 
more balanced in recent months, with growing supplies 
of homes for sale and moderation in the pace of home 
price appreciation. Despite a seller’s market environ-
ment, contacts said real estate was a preferred invest-
ment choice, given the volatile U.S. stock market. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has leveled off in the latest reporting period. Still, the labor market has remained 
tight, and wage growth has picked up slightly. Businesses noted that both input costs and selling prices continued to rise 
at a steady pace. Manufacturing activity leveled off, while business was down slightly in a number of service industries. 
On the other hand, tourism has remained fairly robust. Holiday season sales were a bit on the sluggish side but still up 
from a year ago. Housing markets have shown some further signs of softening, while commercial real estate markets 
have been steady overall. Finally, banks reported some weakening in loan demand and little change in delinquency 
rates.     
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight across the District, 
with employers continuing to report difficulties in filling a 
wide variety of open positions. Businesses reported that 
employment was little changed, on balance, since the 
last report. Firms in manufacturing, wholesale trade, 
finance, and leisure & hospitality reported modest net 
hiring, while contacts in the transportation, health & 
education, and professional & business services sectors 
indicated that employment was flat to down modestly. 
Retailers noted little change in holiday-season hiring, 
relative to the prior year, though more staff was reported-
ly assigned to handling on-line orders. 
Wages have picked up somewhat, particularly in retail 
and leisure & hospitality. Employers indicated that they 
are budgeting for moderately larger wage increases in 
2019 than they did for 2018. A number of business con-
tacts in New York State, including a few manufacturers, 
expressed concern about the recent hike in New York’s 
minimum wage.            
Prices  
Businesses reported little change in the pace of both 
input price increases and selling price increases in the 
latest reporting period. Input price pressures tended to 
be most widespread in manufacturing, finance, and 
education & health. Contacts across most industry sec-
tors reported steady to moderately rising selling prices. 
Two exceptions were real estate and transportation, 
where more contacts said they planned to reduce than 
raise their prices. A sizable proportion of businesses in 
transportation and wholesale trade indicated plans to 
hike prices in the months ahead.  
Retailers generally indicated that selling prices remained 
stable, though some noted more widespread discounting 
than in recent years. Average ticket prices for Broadway 
shows rose less than usual this past December and 
were down more than 5 percent from a year earlier.  
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were mixed but, on balance, up modestly. A 
major retail chain noted that holiday season sales were 
up modestly from the prior year but slightly below plan. 
Retailers in upstate New York were somewhat more 
upbeat, characterizing sales as fairly strong.  A growing 
share of sales have been on-line, including merchandise 
ordered in advance and picked up at stores. Inventories 
were a bit leaner than usual going into the holiday sea-
son, but they were mostly at or slightly above desired 
levels at the start of the new year.   
New vehicle sales were mostly flat in recent weeks, 
according to dealers in upstate New York, but down from 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
a year earlier. New vehicle inventories remained a bit on 
the high side. Sales of used vehicles were mixed but, on 
balance, steady. Dealers indicated that credit conditions 
remained in good shape. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA), which had climbed to a cyclical high in Novem-
ber, retreated in December but remained quite elevated, 
based on the Conference Board’s monthly survey.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
The manufacturing and distribution sectors weakened 
noticeably in the latest reporting period. Manufacturers 
noted a sharp deceleration in business activity, while 
wholesale distributors and transportation firms reported 
outright declines.  
Looking to the months ahead, contacts in these sectors 
remained somewhat optimistic, on balance, though less 
so than in recent months. As in recent reports, a handful 
of contacts continued to express concern about tariffs 
and trade restrictions.       
Services 
Overall, business has been mixed but, on balance, softer 
in the latest reporting period. Contacts in the profession-
al & business services, education & health, and infor-
mation industries reported flat to declining activity at year 
end, though they remain cautiously optimistic about the 
near-term outlook.  
Leisure & hospitality businesses reported steady, moder-
ate growth. In particular, New York City saw fairly strong 
tourism over the holiday season. A local tourism-sector 
expert indicated that the number of visitors has climbed 
and hotel occupancy rates remained high, though visi-
tors have been spending less, on average, than in the 
past. Broadway theaters reported strong gains in reve-
nues and especially attendance, which was up more 
than 20 percent from a year earlier in December.          
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have softened since 
the last report. Homes sales in upstate New York have 
slowed somewhat, and the prevalence of bidding wars 
has receded; still, the inventory of homes on the market 
remains exceptionally low, and prices have continued to 
rise, reflecting solid demand and low supply.  
In New York City, sales of existing co-ops and condos 
continued to slow, especially on new developments. 
Selling prices for newly-built condos have fallen sharply, 
while resale prices on existing apartments edged down 
last quarter but remained slightly ahead of a year earlier. 
The inventory of unsold homes has risen noticeably but 
is still fairly low by historical standards. Housing markets 
in the rest of the metro area have seen similar trends: 
weakening sales, steady prices, and rising (but still low) 
inventories. A local housing-industry expert noted that 
the curtailed federal tax deductibility of homeowner 
expenses has caused trepidation among both current 
and prospective homeowners.  
Residential rents across the District have been mostly 
flat and little changed from a year earlier. In New York 
City, landlord concessions have remained ubiquitous, 
and this has helped to keep rental vacancy rates low.  
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
little changed overall. Office availability rates have been 
steady, while asking rents have been steady to up mod-
erately. Retail markets have continued to soften, and 
there has been concern that retail vacancies will rise 
more sharply after the holiday season. Industrial mar-
kets, on the other hand, have remained robust: rents 
have continued to climb briskly and availability rates 
have been steady at or near multi-year lows.  
New multi-family construction starts were sluggish, 
though a substantial volume of residential development 
remains under construction—particularly in New York 
City. New commercial construction starts have also been 
fairly subdued, aside from a sizable volume of new office 
development in Long Island.  
Banking and Finance 
Small- to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
lower demand for consumer loans, residential mortgag-
es, and C&I loans, but steady demand for commercial 
mortgages. A decrease was also reported in refinancing 
activity. Bankers noted unchanged credit standards for 
residential mortgages but tightening standards for other 
types of loans. There was some further narrowing in loan 
spreads for consumer loans and residential mortgages. 
Finally, banks reported that delinquency rates held 
steady across all categories. ■  
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, aggregate business activity in the Third District maintained a modest pace of growth during the current 
Beige Book period, although slowing occurred among service sectors and some real estate activity declined. The labor 
market remains tight, which continued to constrain hiring at a modest pace and to apply moderate upward wage pres-
sures. Price pressures remained modest and eased a bit for service sectors. Nonfinancial services eased back to a 
modest pace of growth, while manufacturing and nonauto retail sales maintained a modest pace. Auto sales were es-
sentially unchanged, and tourism activity continued to grow slightly. Residential real estate sectors tended to decline, 
while commercial real estate tended to be flat or down slightly. The growth outlook over the next six months remained 
positive, with half of the nonmanufacturing firms and over 40 percent of the manufacturers anticipating increases in 
general activity. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. The share of firms report-
ing an increase in staff generally ranged between 15 and 
25 percent among broad sectors. The firms noted very 
little change in the average hours worked since the prior 
Beige Book period.  
Many contacts continued to note a tight labor market; 
however, builders said that construction activity had 
peaked or was peaking and that residential and commer-
cial contractors were beginning to scramble for new 
projects to keep their workers employed. Staffing firms 
reported ongoing difficulty hiring and retaining workers, 
although one firm noted that orders had slowed a bit.  
On balance, wage growth continued at a moderate pace 
as firms typically cited increases for wages and benefits 
that averaged 3.0 to 3.5 percent. In one of the District’s 
tightest labor markets, average wage rates were up 6.0 
percent over the prior year. The share of nonmanufactur-
ing contacts who reported increases in wage and benefit 
costs remained steady at just over one-third. One staff-
ing firm noted that wage increases had slowed but that 
several clients would be evaluating starting wages in 
early 2019, so wage rate hikes were expected to pick 
back up in the first quarter.  
Prices  
Price increases remained modest for most firms. More-
over, compared with the prior period, a lower percentage 
of nonmanufacturing firms reported higher prices paid for 
inputs and prices received for their own goods. The 
share of manufacturing firms reporting increases in 
prices paid remained just above 40 percent, while prices 
received by manufacturers and prices paid by nonmanu-
facturers increased for about 25 percent of the firms. The 
share of nonmanufacturing firms reporting increases in 
prices received fell below 15 percent.  
Looking ahead six months, nearly 60 percent of the 
manufacturing firms continued to anticipate paying high-
er prices for inputs, while those firms expecting to re-
ceive higher prices for their own goods fell to 45 percent.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity continued at a modest pace of 
growth – typical for the Third District. The percentage of 
firms that reported increased shipments fell somewhat, 
while the percentage reporting an increase in new orders 
edged up.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
The makers of paper products, primary metal products, 
and electronic equipment tended to note gains in new 
orders and shipments; the makers of lumber products, 
chemicals, fabricated metal products, and industrial 
equipment reported mixed results. Contacts often cited 
labor supply issues as a deterrent to growth, in addition 
to supply chain problems, rising commodity prices, and 
uncertainty surrounding tariffs. Demand for equipment to 
supply the oil and gas producing sectors has slackened 
again.  
On balance, manufacturers continued to expect general 
activity to increase over the next six months. Expecta-
tions of future increases in new orders, shipments, em-
ployment, and capital spending remained nearly the 
same as the prior period and at high levels.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retailers reported a continuation of modest 
growth through the holiday season. Many contacts noted 
increased traffic per store and greater spending per 
customer – citing good weather, low gas prices, and an 
extended holiday shopping season as supporting factors.  
Auto sales remained essentially flat compared with high 
2017 levels – which continued to surprise dealers. While 
dealers provided early projections of slight year-over-
year increases for December, in January, some dealers 
observed that year-end sales appeared to have slowed.  
Tourism activity continued to grow slightly, according to 
contacts. A lack of snow hampered ski resort activity, but 
occupancies and spending at mountain resorts and 
restaurants remained solid. Growth of total Atlantic City 
casino revenue remained high in November, while tradi-
tional revenue from slots and table games fell again, 
exclusive of the two new casinos.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Service-sector firms reported a modest pace of growth – 
a notable slowdown from the prior Beige Book period. 
The percentage of firms reporting increased sales fell by 
over 20 percentage points to about 35 percent, and 
reports of new orders dropped 10 points to about 25 
percent. Meanwhile, reports of declining sales and fewer 
new orders increased. Despite widespread reports of a 
slowdown, one large firm noted that its customers re-
main current on their bills. Expectations of future growth 
remained relatively strong but did fall to half of firms from 
two-thirds in the prior period.  
 
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report modest growth on a 
year-over-year basis in credit card lending and in overall 
loan volumes (excluding credit cards).  
During the current period (reported without seasonal 
adjustments), volumes grew moderately in mortgages 
and in commercial and industrial lending; grew modestly 
in commercial real estate; and declined somewhat in 
home equity lines, auto loans, and other consumer loans 
(not elsewhere classified).  
Bankers continued to note a strong underlying economy 
but reported that clients were “jittery” due to economic 
uncertainty. Contacts continued to cite strong competi-
tion for deposits and quality loans but noted little concern 
over credit quality deterioration.  
Real Estate and Construction 
According to homebuilders, activity appears to have 
fallen modestly – one large builder reported that the 
market had softened further in November. A smaller 
central Pennsylvania builder noted slow sales through 
year-end and the “lowest traffic in eight to 10 years,” 
while a South Jersey builder reported okay sales but that 
its backlog was down 14 percent compared with last 
year. 
Existing home sales continued to decline moderately 
across most local markets – hampered by extremely low 
inventories. However, recent sales and an inventory 
drawdown have strengthened the Poconos market, 
which has labored with an excess of foreclosed proper-
ties since the Great Recession.  
On balance, commercial real estate construction contin-
ued to decline slightly off high levels. Contacts noted 
ongoing strength in industrial/warehouse properties, 
except in areas with an insufficient labor supply. While 
architects and engineers remain busy, the pipeline is 
thinning for new office, retail, and high-rise residential 
projects. Contractors are preparing for a slight decline in 
2019 activity. Commercial leasing activity has held 
steady, but analysts note an abundance of caution 
among market participants. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Fourth District increased slightly since our previous report, with firms across industries reporting 
mostly stable demand. District firms continued hiring at a moderate but slightly softer pace than in recent months. Con-
tacts noted continuing wage pressures to attract and retain workers. Reported wage increases were moderate and in 
line with recent trends. Upward costs pressures, especially for raw materials, remained elevated. Contacts also noted 
higher transportation costs. Builders and manufacturers reported being able to pass through cost increases to their 
customers. Demand was stable or increased in retail, construction, and nonfinancial services but softened slightly in 
manufacturing and banking, a situation which contacts largely attributed to seasonal factors. 
Employment and Wages  
District firms added workers at a pace that was moderate 
but slightly softer than in the previous survey period. 
Most firms that reported increased hiring also noted 
improved customer demand, while firms that reported 
decreased hiring noted seasonal business declines as 
reasons behind their staffing decisions. Across various 
industries, several firms reported hiring for new positions 
because of business expansions. Contacts also reported 
hiring to replace departed workers. A steel producer 
noted difficulty finding hourly workers. Driver turnover 
remained a problem in the freight industry; however, one 
trucking contact reported some success hiring drivers. 
Reports of wage pressures were similar to those of the 
previous period, and firms across many industries of-
fered increased incentives to retain workers and attract 
new talent. In addition to annual cost-of-living and merit 
increases, some construction contacts raised incentives 
for retention, and manufacturers increased base pay to 
attract skilled new hires.   
Prices  
Upward pressures on input costs and selling prices 
remained elevated and were similar to those reported in 
the previous survey period. Contacts reported strong 
pressure on input costs, especially for raw materials, 
including steel, concrete, and wood products. Various 
manufacturing firms continued to attribute cost increases 
to the effect of tariffs. Freight contacts reported recent 
decreases in diesel costs but noted that other costs have 
continued to increase, including truck parts and repairs. 
Retail contacts in turn noted continuing upward pressure 
on freight costs. Construction and manufacturing firms 
raised their prices to pass through higher costs of raw 
materials to consumers. The ability to pass through cost 
increases was similar to that reported in prior survey 
periods. A slightly lower proportion of freight contacts 
raised their rates compared with those who did so during 
the prior survey period. Retail contacts reported season-
al price promotions, while some professional services 
firms noted that increased demand and improved market 
opportunities have allowed them to raise prices.  
Consumer Spending 
Nondurable goods retailers reported slightly improved 
demand, driven primary by seasonal factors. However, 
these retailers believe the momentum from the holidays 
will continue after the holiday shopping season, and they 
predict customer demand in the first quarter will remain 
strong. These retailers expect that growth in 2019 will 
outpace growth in 2018 overall. Nondurable goods retail-
ers continued to see moderate wage and nonlabor cost 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
inflation and raised prices modestly. Auto retailers re-
ported steady to slightly increasing demand overall, 
driven by used and nonluxury vehicles and increased 
new-vehicle incentives. While overall demand is up, 
rising interest rates are holding back demand and shift-
ing it towards less expensive vehicles. Auto retailers 
expect demand to remain steady in the next quarter but 
to decrease in 2019 overall.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing conditions softened at the end of the 
fourth quarter, but many contacts reported that this was 
largely a result of the usual seasonal slowdown. Contin-
ued uncertainty about international trade policy and 
volatility in financial markets may dampen demand in 
2019, and contacts signaled that customers’ capital 
expenditures are slowing. They also acknowledged that 
some of the strength in 2018 was driven by orders being 
pulled-ahead amid concern about future price increases, 
which have now come to pass or will be implemented in 
early 2019. The outlook for conditions in 2019 remains 
fair. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential builders and realtors reported stable demand 
in the current period, a break from a trend of softening 
demand for housing in the recent survey periods. While 
decreasing home affordability weighed on customer 
demand over the past year, a slight drop in mortgage 
rates spurred some demand recently. The decrease in 
home affordability was driven by rising interest rates and 
also by rising selling prices as builders boosted prices to 
cover their increases in wages and nonlabor costs. Real-
tors noted decreased demand from first-time homebuy-
ers. Housing inventory was stable. Residential builders 
expect worsening demand both in the first quarter and in 
2019 overall. 
Conditions in nonresidential construction continued to be 
strong and improved slightly during the period. Demand 
from the industrial and education sectors was noted to 
be especially strong. Backlogs remained elevated and 
were increasing. Commercial real estate developers 
reported stable conditions. Most nonresidential builders 
were optimistic about growth in the first quarter, and 
commercial real estate developers expect stable condi-
tions. Nonresidential builders expect moderate growth in 
2019 overall. Commercial real estate developers’ out-
looks for 2019 were mixed.  
Financial Services 
Banking conditions softened slightly, driven by seasonal-
ity in commercial real estate, mortgage, and auto lend-
ing. Business inquiries were steady, and large and mid-
dle-market firms continued to seek financing for plant 
equipment and mergers and acquisitions. Volatility in 
financial markets and political uncertainty have had a 
negative effect on consumer and business confidence 
and cloud the outlook for loan demand in the coming 
quarter. Some bankers indicated that rising interest rates 
may also dampen demand.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in nonfinancial services increased at a modest 
pace. Professional and business services firms noted 
increased demand, especially in the information sector, 
in which firms reported regular year-end increases in 
purchases of software and digital technologies. Freight 
contacts noted that while demand remains high, capacity 
constraints continued to limit growth in the industry, and 
while most freight contacts reported stable demand 
during the period, some trucking contacts noted softer 
demand compared with that of the previous quarter 
because of the pull-ahead of imports from China. Sever-
al contacts anticipate continuing high levels of activity, 
but some reported cautious optimism about the near 
future. ■ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Since our previous Beige Book report, the Fifth District economy expanded at a modest rate. One exception was the 
manufacturing sector where many firms reported a decline in shipments and new orders and continued to report high 
input costs due to tariffs. Meanwhile, District ports saw robust activity, mainly from imports as companies tried to get 
goods in the country ahead of anticipated tariff increases. Trucking remained strong but companies continued to report 
capacity constraints in both labor and trucks. Travel and tourism increased modestly, overall, while retail shopping was 
hampered by adverse weather. Residential real estate activity picked up modestly with an increase in home sales but a 
decline in buyer traffic. Meanwhile, demand for commercial real estate increased moderately, with notable strength in 
industrial leasing. Lenders saw a modest increase in demand, particularly for commercial lending. On balance, nonfinan-
cial services firms experienced modest growth. Energy sector firms reported moderate growth as coal production in-
creased and pipeline construction continued. The demand for labor increased moderately while wage growth remained 
modest. Price growth remained moderate, overall, despite firms’ reports of higher input costs.  
Employment and Wages  
On balance, the demand for labor increased modestly in 
recent weeks, but firms indicated that hiring remained 
constrained by the tight labor market. Some of the most 
hard-to-fill positions were electricians, hotel and restau-
rant workers, construction workers and managers, com-
puter engineers, and cyber professionals. Meanwhile, a 
staffing agency reported a decrease in demand for tem-
porary staffing services as more clients were hiring full-
time workers instead. Wage growth remained modest, 
overall; however, a few contacts reported sharp increas-
es in starting wages for particular positions.  
Prices  
Since our previous Beige Book report, price growth 
remained moderate, overall. According to our most 
recent surveys, manufacturing firms continued to report 
margin compression as input price growth outpaced 
selling price growth. Several manufacturers attributed 
the rise in input costs to tariffs. A food manufacturer 
added that the loss of domestic crops due to adverse 
weather forced them to turn to higher-priced imports, 
which were subject to tariffs. Likewise, service sector 
firms saw moderate price growth for selling prices that 
was outpaced by input price growth. Several services 
firms also attributed higher input costs to tariffs.  
Manufacturing 
A large share of the Fifth District manufacturers sur-
veyed reported a decline in shipments and new orders in 
recent weeks. Some firms attributed the decrease to 
slowing global demand, adverse weather conditions, 
and/or seasonal factors. Meanwhile, rising raw materials 
costs were widely reported with some price increases 
being attributed to tariffs. A Maryland can manufacturer 
looked for ways to increase automation to reduce the 
number of employees in order to help offset the rising 
cost of raw materials. A Virginia display case manufac-
turer had Chinese goods shipped through west coast 
ports in order to get goods to the country ahead of an 
anticipated tariff increase. Meanwhile, a West Virginia 
steel company increased capital expenditures as they 
experienced strong business.  
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports saw robust activity in recent weeks. 
Import volumes continued to exceed export volumes. 
Port executives noted a slight softening in auto exports 
but saw strong growth in imports, particularly from China. 
They attributed much of the strong import volumes to 
orders being made early to avoid possible tariff hikes, 
and they expected trade to soften in the next few 
months. One port had to store incoming cargo for retail-
The Beige Book ■ January 2019

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
ers who did not have adequate storage space. A District 
airport reported strong demand despite some weather 
related cancellations.  
Demand for trucking remained strong in recent weeks 
despite a typical seasonal slowdown in shipping. Truck-
ing firms continued to report capacity constraints. Some 
companies looked for more drivers to hire while others 
had enough drivers but not enough trucks. Trucking 
firms were generally optimistic about future growth and 
continued to make capital investments, but some con-
tacts expressed concerns about tariffs and rising interest 
rates.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Travel and tourism grew modestly in the Fifth District in 
recent weeks. In Asheville, North Carolina, hotels were 
fully booked through the holidays, and tourism remained 
strong in Charleston, South Carolina, despite poor 
weather. However, hotels in Washington, D.C., saw 
lower occupancy and fewer meeting space reservations. 
New hotels and restaurants continued to open around 
the Fifth District, and some business owners expressed 
concerns about retaining their staff as competition in-
creases. A Virginia resort executive noted that heavy 
reliance on J1 visa holders made them vulnerable to 
possible changes in immigration law. 
Retailers in the Fifth District reported mixed conditions 
since our last report. Many firms felt that inclement 
weather hurt their business. A North Carolina auto deal-
er reported good business, particularly for new cars that 
had strong manufacturer’s incentives, but saw a slight 
softening in demand for used vehicles. A West Virginia 
store saw profit margins decline as they were unable to 
pass along higher transportation costs. Conversely, a 
Maryland retailer was able to raise prices to pass along 
higher costs that stemmed from steel tariffs.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate firms indicated modest growth, 
overall. Home sales rose modestly in recent weeks and 
were reportedly up compared to last year. Sales prices 
increased modestly, overall. Meanwhile, home invento-
ries remained at low levels, as homes in good condition 
continued to sell quickly. However, contacts reported a 
slight uptick in days on the market in the past few weeks 
because of reduced buyer traffic. In most markets, new 
residential construction continued at a modest pace with 
limited speculative construction. 
 
On the whole, commercial real estate activity picked up 
moderately in recent weeks. District brokers continued to 
report strong industrial leasing activity, and in the office 
and retail sectors, only a few contacts reported the nor-
mal seasonal slowing. District brokers continued to re-
port low vacancy rates and strong absorption rates. 
Rental rates generally increased across the industrial 
market while rate increases were reportedly stable to flat 
for retail and office space. Multifamily leasing remained 
strong, but reports on construction activity varied across 
the District.   
Banking and Finance 
Loan demand grew modestly in recent weeks as gains in 
commercial lending drove the overall increase. Residen-
tial mortgage lending was generally reported as flat to 
down slightly compared to about a month ago, but up 
from the same time last year. On the commercial side, 
real estate loan demand picked up moderately. Deposits 
rose moderately, on balance, in recent weeks. Business 
loan demand increased slightly while automotive lending 
was reportedly flat. Credit quality and credit standards 
remained strong throughout the District.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Since our previous Beige Book, nonfinancial services 
demand increased modestly, overall. The most positive 
reports came from firms in the tech sector. A software 
development firm and an IT consulting business reported 
strong growth. Also, a Fifth District university reported an 
increase in interest in computer science and IT related 
majors. Meanwhile, an accounting firm experienced solid 
growth and expected continued growth in 2019.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Energy sector contacts reported moderate growth. Coal 
production increased in West Virginia as the demand for 
coal exports remained strong and prices were fairly 
stable. Pipeline construction continued but was running 
behind schedule due to adverse weather conditions. In 
addition, construction in some areas was halted over 
environmental issues.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts remained largely positive with a majority noting that economic activity grew at a moder-
ate pace over the reporting period. Most contacts expect steady growth in the near-term; however, several contacts 
cited increased levels of uncertainty going into 2019, to include concerns over politics and trade. As labor markets re-
mained tight, many firms noted increasing retention efforts. On balance, wages increased since the previous report, with 
pressure growing particularly among low-skill, hourly positions. Nonlabor input costs increased and the ability to pass 
along the increases varied among firms. Contacts reported that retail sales were solid during the holiday season and 
vehicle sales were up slightly. Reports from the hospitality sector were positive, reflecting strong advanced bookings for 
early 2019. Contacts reported that residential real estate activity slowed and commercial real estate activity remained 
stable over the reporting period. Manufacturers indicated that new orders and production levels decreased since the 
previous report. Contacts indicated that banking conditions were stable.  
Employment and Wages  
Similar to previous reports, business contacts remained 
focused on employee retention. District employers con-
tinued to expand wage and non-wage compensation 
offerings to retain workers. In spite of these efforts, firms 
expressed concern about their ability to meet growing 
demand with existing staffing levels. A few contacts from 
construction, manufacturing, and health services men-
tioned they were actively overstaffing certain positions 
where possible, or were holding on to workers even as 
demand eased in an effort to position themselves for 
future growth. Business contacts also mentioned that 
efforts to build culture and loyalty remained important to 
retention.   
Average wage increases were typically reported around 
3 percent across the District, a level that most firms 
intend to maintain in 2019. Broadly, businesses contin-
ued to report notable wage pressure among low-skill, 
hourly jobs, particularly in hospitality and retail. A num-
ber of business contacts noted that announcements by 
large national companies to raise their minimum wage 
intensified pressure among similar jobs. Challenges with 
escalating wage pressure were especially acute among 
small businesses, which reported struggles to compete 
with large- and medium-sized firms’ ability to increase 
wages. 
         
Prices  
District firms continued to report rising input costs, partic-
ularly for products impacted by tariffs. Price increases 
related to tariffs were passed along with no significant 
pushback or impact to margins. However, some busi-
nesses reported hesitancy to pass along increases unre-
lated to tariffs, opting instead to continue to internalize 
cost pressures through a combination of lower margins 
and productivity improvements. The Atlanta Fed’s Busi-
ness Inflation Expectations survey showed year-over-
year unit costs were up 2.2 percent in December. Survey 
respondents indicated they expect unit costs to rise 2.3 
percent over the next twelve months.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
On balance, District retailers reported steady sales levels 
throughout the holiday season. Online sales levels con-
tinued to grow at a faster pace than brick and mortar 
sales. Recreational goods retailers noted an increase in 
sales since the last report. Automotive dealers reported 
an uptick in sales levels in November. 
Travel and tourism contacts across the District noted a 
strong holiday travel season with growth in business and 
leisure travel. Hotel demand and average daily rates 
were higher than expected. The outlook for 2019 re-
mains positive with healthy advanced bookings through 
the first quarter of the year.   
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
Housing activity slowed on a year-over-over basis to-
wards the end of 2018. In many District areas, existing 
home sales either moderated or declined. Although 
inventory levels remained low, they increased on a year-
over-year basis in many markets. New home construc-
tion continued to lag behind demand with most new 
home starts being concentrated in higher price points 
within prime/high-demand submarkets. Though moderat-
ing, rising construction costs and low supply continued to 
push new home prices higher.  
Commercial real estate leasing and sales activity re-
mained steady during the reporting period. On average, 
vacancy rates in most District markets continued to trend 
downward modestly. Strength continued in the industrial, 
multifamily, and medical sectors. Contacts reported 
momentum in the industrial sector that continued to 
outpace the levels of new supply. Contacts continued to 
report concerns with bankruptcies and slowing activity in 
the big-box retail sector. Office market contacts reported 
overall continued strength; however, higher levels of 
employee densification and greater deliveries of space 
appear to be creating pockets of slowing in some local 
markets.   
Manufacturing 
Reports from manufacturing contacts indicated that 
business conditions softened slightly since the previous 
report. New orders and production levels decreased, and 
purchasing managers reported shorter wait times for 
supply deliveries. However, expectations for future pro-
duction levels increased, with over half of contacts ex-
pecting higher production over the next six months, up 
from the previous report.   
Transportation 
The majority of District transportation contacts reported 
increased activity since the previous report. Ports noted 
record container volumes, along with further growth in 
trade of autos and heavy machinery. According to air 
cargo contacts, global air freight volumes continued to 
grow; however, in recent months, growth decelerated in 
some regions due to a softening in demand. Railroad 
contacts reported significant year-over-year increases in 
total traffic, including notable growth in intermodal ship-
ments. Logistics firms saw improvements in volumes of 
delivered packages as compared with last year’s holiday 
season.   
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions held steady over the 
reporting period. Higher interest rates improved earnings 
and net interest margins for the majority of banks and 
increased competition for deposits. Loan growth contin-
ued but at a slower pace, especially in real estate. Finan-
cial institutions continued to loosen underwriting stand-
ards on selected portfolios due to slowing demand for 
credit and increased competition. Credit quality metrics 
generally remained positive with nonaccrual loans re-
maining near historical lows; however, some institutions 
in the District experienced an increase in consumer 
delinquencies.   
Energy  
Contacts reported that takeaway capacity of oil and gas 
products from the West Texas Permian region to the 
Gulf Coast remained extremely tight. Deepwater produc-
tion continued to pick up in the Gulf Coast, as new drill-
ing platform projects came online in the fourth quarter. 
Refinery utilization declined in the fourth quarter as many 
plants engaged in maintenance/turnarounds during the 
winter months. Demand for renewable energy, especially 
electricity, continued to grow compared to electricity 
generated by coal, gas, or nuclear. Industrial consump-
tion was mostly down in late 2018 due to seasonal fac-
tors. Weather and improved efficiencies continued to 
drive down residential and commercial consumption.   
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Recent reports showed most of the District was drought-
free with the exception of parts of south Florida where 
there were abnormally dry to moderate drought condi-
tions. The USDA designated some counties in Alabama, 
Florida, Georgia, and Mississippi as natural disaster 
areas due to damages and losses attributed to Hurricane 
Michael, Tropical Storm Gordon, and flooding. The De-
cember forecast for Florida’s orange crops was un-
changed from the prior month, but up significantly from 
last year’s production. In mid-December, weekly cash 
prices for corn, cotton, and beef were up while rice, 
soybean, broiler, and egg prices were down on a year-
over-year basis. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District grew at a modest pace in late November and December, and contacts ex-
pected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment, consumer spending, and business 
spending increased modestly; manufacturing increased slightly; and construction and real estate activity was little 
changed. Wages and prices rose modestly and financial conditions deteriorated slightly. Prospects for farm income 
improved as corn, soybean, and wheat prices moved higher. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest pace over 
the reporting period and contacts expected job gains to 
continue at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Hiring 
was focused on production and professional and tech-
nical workers, while there was a decline in the number of 
contacts planning to hire sales workers. As they have for 
some time, contacts indicated that the labor market was 
tight and that they had difficulty filling positions at all skill 
levels. A staffing firm that primarily supplies manufactur-
ers with production workers reported continued difficulty 
in filling orders and no change in billable hours. Wage 
growth remained modest overall. Contacts were most 
likely to report wage increases for managerial, profes-
sional and technical, and administrative workers. Multiple 
manufacturing contacts reported that rising wages for 
entry-level positions was leading them to invest in auto-
mation that would increase these workers’ productivity 
and justify the higher wages. Many firms reported grow-
ing benefits costs. 
Prices 
Prices rose modestly in late November and December, 
and contacts expected prices to continue to increase at 
that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail prices 
increased slightly overall. Producer prices again rose 
moderately, reflecting in part the pass-through of higher 
labor, materials, and freight costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending rose modestly over the reporting 
period. Nonauto retail sales increased at a moderate 
pace, as contacts reported solid holiday sales and wide-
spread gains across sales categories. Contacts also 
highlighted significant growth in the travel and personal 
service sectors. Light vehicle sales were flat and slightly 
under dealers’ expectations for the reporting period. 
Some contacts attributed the slower-than-expected 
vehicle sales to rising interest rates and declines in the 
stock market. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in late November 
and December. Retail contacts said that inventories 
were generally at comfortable levels. Most manufactur-
ing contacts also reported that stocks were at comforta-
ble levels, though steel service center inventories re-
mained below historical norms and one steel consumer 
reported cutting back their own production because of 
steel input shortages. Capital spending increased mod-
estly and contacts expected growth to continue at that 
pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were primari-
ly for replacing industrial and IT equipment and for reno-
vating structures. Energy demand from commercial and 
industrial users increased modestly, led by greater con-
sumption by data centers and manufacturers. Demand 
for transportation services also increased modestly from 
an already strong level. 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was little changed 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased slightly, with growth concentrated in the subur-
ban single-family market. Nonresidential construction 
was little changed on balance, with reports of increased 
activity in the industrial and infrastructure sectors offset 
by declines elsewhere. Home sales were flat overall, 
though one contact in the Detroit area reported a moder-
ate decline in sales, particularly for homes under 
$250,000. Home prices and residential rents increased 
slightly. Commercial real estate activity was little 
changed, though the pace remained strong. Vacancy 
rates, sublease space, and rents were little changed. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production slowed in late No-
vember and December, with contacts reporting only a 
slight increase in output. That said, most contacts were 
pleased with the level of production. Demand for steel 
increased, but at a slower rate than earlier in the year. 
Steel imports continued to decline. Demand for heavy 
machinery increased moderately, with growth spread 
across the construction, transportation, and energy 
sectors. Demand for heavy trucks increased slightly from 
an already strong level. Specialty metals manufacturers 
reported modest increases in order books, with contacts 
highlighting growth in the medical devices, aerospace, 
and defense sectors. Auto production declined slightly, 
but remained at a solid level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions deteriorated slightly overall during 
the reporting period. Financial market participants noted 
substantial declines in equities prices and increased 
volatility. Business loan demand increased modestly, 
with contacts highlighting growth in the construction, 
manufacturing, and transportation sectors. Loan quality 
and lending standards were little changed. Consumer 
loan demand increased slightly, supported by increased 
auto lending. Consumer loan quality and lending stand-
ards were little changed. Demand for consumer insur-
ance was also little changed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Prices for corn, soybeans, and wheat moved higher over 
the reporting period, supported in part by news that trade 
talks between the U.S. and China had resumed and that 
China had purchased some U.S. soybeans. A second 
round of payments from the Federal Government’s Mar-
ket Facilitation Program also supported farm incomes 
(primarily for soybean producers), although payments 
have been disrupted by the government shutdown. The 
shutdown also slowed the release of government reports 
on agricultural market conditions, leading to greater 
uncertainty for market participants. Contacts noted that 
the profitability of the 2018 harvest was still unclear as a 
large amount of the harvest remained unsold. Lower 
ethanol prices weighed on ethanol producers, and there 
were reports of plant closures as well as expectations of 
more closures in the future. Cattle, egg, and dairy prices 
all rose, though dairies generally continued to face diffi-
cult operating conditions. Hog prices fell over the report-
ing period. Contacts noted that rising input prices for 
crop and livestock producers as well as higher interest 
rates were shrinking margins. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts indicate that economic conditions have slightly improved since our previous report. Firms contin-
ued to report difficulties finding qualified workers. Overall, wage pressures have increased moderately, with contacts 
citing minimum wage increases as a contributing factor. Reports on consumer spending were positive. Activity in the 
manufacturing sector has increased in recent months, although at a slower rate than noted in the previous report. Dis-
trict banking contacts reported positive but slower growth in loan volumes during the fourth quarter. Agricultural condi-
tions improved slightly thanks to higher crop prices; however, overall conditions remain weak in this sector. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has grown slightly since the previous re-
port. Contacts in Arkansas and Missouri reported slight 
growth in manufacturing employment, and small busi-
ness employment increased modestly. Information tech-
nology firms in the St. Louis area reported plans to in-
crease hiring in early 2019. Contacts throughout the 
District continued to cite difficulties finding qualified 
employees. The labor market was particularly tight for 
technical jobs, with some firms lowering education re-
quirements to attract more candidates. Schools and 
firms also continued to develop training programs to 
alleviate shortages in skilled trades. 
Wages have increased moderately since the previous 
report. Pay raises were especially strong for entry-level 
positions. Contacts in information technology and manu-
facturing reported that labor market tightness led to 
increases in starting wages. Furthermore, minimum 
wage increases in healthcare and the public sector were 
either announced or took effect throughout the District. 
Small business wages in Missouri and Tennessee grew 
moderately. 
Prices  
Prices have remained unchanged on net since the previ-
ous report. Metal prices have decreased slightly. Steel 
prices showed some of the largest declines, but remain 
elevated in year-over-year terms. Coal prices have risen 
slightly since the previous report. 
Broadly, agricultural prices have risen slightly since the 
previous report. Prices for soybeans and soybean meal 
have risen around 3 percent but remain lower than one 
year ago. Corn, corn meal, and sorghum all have posted 
particularly strong gains since the previous report. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate that consumer spending activity has in-
creased modestly since our previous report. November 
real sales tax collections increased in Arkansas, Tennes-
see, and Kentucky, but decreased in Missouri relative to 
a year ago. The West Tennessee consumer outlook 
remains positive, albeit less positive than earlier this 
year. On net, West Tennessee consumers expect to 
spend more compared with last year. Reports from Lou-
isville auto dealers indicated that auto sales do not seem 
to have been affected by rising interest rates. Arkansas 
tourism sales tax revenue increased year over year. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased at a moderate pace 
since our previous report. Survey-based indexes showed 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
that Arkansas and Missouri manufacturing activity con-
tinued to expand from November to December, but the 
pace of growth slowed. New orders and production also 
increased in both states, but at a slower pace than in the 
previous report. Several contacts expressed an optimis-
tic outlook for the next quarter, including manufacturers 
of commercial vehicle parts and primary metals. An 
aluminum producer reported running at nearly full capac-
ity and is considering additional expansion options. 
Similarly, contacts in the vehicle parts manufacturing 
industry noted strong sales in October. On the other 
hand, several manufacturers noted increases in wages 
leading to higher costs and higher turnover rates, making 
it difficult for them to recruit engineers and staff. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has been 
unchanged since the previous report. The number of 
vacancies for nonfinancial services occupations in De-
cember has decreased over the previous month. This 
can be attributed to a slowdown following the holiday 
rush; however, year-to-year vacancies are also down. 
The transportation industry continues to experience 
growth. Major logistics firms continue to make invest-
ments in distribution centers across the District. Growth 
is limited in the river transportation industry as barges 
dependent on coal transportation continue to experience 
a slowdown in this line of business.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has improved slightly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for November increased slightly from the previous 
report across most of the District’s four largest MSAs. 
Inventory levels remained low.  
Residential construction activity was flat. St. Louis build-
ers reported a slight decline in year-to-date single-family 
permits, but were optimistic that the recent decline in 
mortgage rates would increase construction activity in 
the near future. Contacts in Louisville expressed concern 
regarding rising interest rates and the rising cost of build-
ing homes. 
Commercial real estate activity has improved slightly 
since the previous report. Louisville contacts reported 
increased demand for retail property types compared 
with this time last year. Commercial construction activity 
was flat. Louisville contacts noted that multi-family con-
struction is robust while there is a lack of new warehouse 
construction. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have improved modest-
ly since the previous report. According to reports from 
bankers, outstanding loan volumes grew by 4 percent 
relative to year-ago levels in the fourth quarter, which 
was a slight dip from the third quarter, continuing the 
steady decline in the rate of loan growth since the end of 
2016. Commercial and industrial lending continued to be 
robust, but took a slight downward turn from the third 
quarter. Residential real estate lending in the District 
continued to grow slowly and lagged behind national 
rates for the fourth consecutive quarter. Commercial real 
estate maintained a positive, but slightly lower, growth 
rate compared with last quarter. Bankers reported a 
slight increase in deposits growth. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have improved slightly 
since the previous report. The percentage of winter 
wheat rated fair or better remained approximately un-
changed from the end of October to the end of Novem-
ber and remains at 93 percent. This is an increase from 
89 percent of winter wheat rated fair or better at the end 
of 2017. Contacts continued to report very high crop 
yields for 2018. However, farmers still face headwinds 
due to low crop prices and continued trade concerns. 
Natural resource extraction conditions improved slightly 
from October to November, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production increasing slightly. November production 
was also up slightly from a year ago.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew moderately, though lack of 
available labor continued to hamper overall hiring. Wage pressures were moderate, while price pressures were modest. 
The District economy showed growth in consumer spending, manufacturing, commercial real estate, and mining. How-
ever, construction and residential real estate were mixed, energy slowed, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report, 
though lack of available labor continued to hamper 
overall hiring. Demand for labor across the District has 
ebbed slightly but remained healthy overall. November 
job postings fell slightly in Minnesota, South Dakota and 
Michigan’s Upper Peninsula compared with a year 
earlier, in contrast with double-digit increases in Montana 
and North Dakota. Among more than a dozen staffing 
firm contacts, mostly in Minneapolis-St. Paul, a small 
majority said job orders and total clients were higher in 
the fourth quarter compared with a year earlier. But tight 
labor supply was limiting job placements and hours 
booked among staffing firms, with unfilled job orders 
seeing a notable increase. Surveys by the Minneapolis 
Fed in late November and December identified labor 
availability as the biggest obstacle to short-term growth. 
In a separate, external survey of Minnesota builders, 
almost two-thirds said the lack of available labor has 
forced them to turn down business. A Montana retailer 
noted that “every business is hiring and the hiring pool is 
shallow.” Very little relief in labor supply was expected. 
Numerous metro areas were at or near record-low 
unemployment; unemployment insurance claims over 
the most recent six-week period (through mid-
December) dropped more than 4 percent across District 
states, and continuing claims dropped by 10 percent. 
Wage pressures rose moderately. Recent surveys by the 
Minneapolis Fed found widespread wage increases that 
coalesced a little below 3 percent. One survey found 
more persistent wage increases for new employees and 
specific positions, rather than company-wide raises. 
Staffing firm contacts noted continued reluctance among 
some clients to raise wages enough to change hiring 
difficulties. “Clients are not changing with the labor 
market, so wages are not going up as much as they 
should,” said a contact in Minneapolis-St. Paul. A central 
Minnesota contact said that “skilled trades are hard to 
find and wages are not increasing (enough) to bring in 
good candidates that have the necessary skills and 
background.” Most surveys showed that expectations for 
future wage hikes were slightly below 3 percent. One 
modest exception was the Minneapolis Fed’s annual 
manufacturing survey (conducted in partnership with the 
Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic 
Development). Respondents to this survey expected 
wages to increase by 3 percent to 5 percent in 2019.   
Prices  
Price pressures were modest since the last report. 
Slightly more than half of respondents to the Minneapolis 
Fed’s annual manufacturing survey reported that prices 
charged for their products increased over the past year, 
while just over a third reported unchanged prices. For 
the coming year, a similar proportion expected to  
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
increase their prices, while a strong majority expected 
the rate of inflation in the broader economy to increase. 
Retail fuel prices continued to fall sharply in District 
states through the end of 2018, reaching their lowest 
levels in nearly two years by early January. Prices 
received by farmers for corn, wheat, hay, hogs, cattle, 
and eggs increased in October compared with a year 
earlier; prices for soybeans, milk, chickens, and turkeys 
decreased.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending rose moderately since the last 
report. State-level sales tax collections in November 
were higher in the Dakotas and Wisconsin. Lodging 
taxes were higher in Montana over this period, but hotel 
occupancy rates in Minnesota fell and average room 
rates were flat. Total enplanements at a number of 
District airports in November rose notably, with the 
exception of Minneapolis-St. Paul International, which 
saw a slight decrease. Retail contacts reported a strong 
holiday shopping season overall. A mall manager in 
southern Minnesota said foot traffic was up on Black 
Friday compared with a year earlier, and stayed strong 
though the holidays despite the loss of a major anchor 
tenant earlier in the year. The manager added, “Overall 
sales and traffic exceeded expectations almost entirely 
across the board.”  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was mixed since the last 
report. An industry database of construction spending 
showed November activity was slower than a year 
earlier, particularly for nonresidential building. However, 
this was possibly related to a particularly strong October. 
Construction contacts in Minneapolis-St. Paul noted 
strong demand for new industrial building, but office 
construction was slow. Another industry database 
showed that projects out for bid in District states were 
somewhat higher over the most recent six-week period 
(through mid-December) compared with a year earlier. 
The average number of active projects was also higher 
over the same period; however, this might be the result 
of projects taking longer due to labor shortages in 
construction. Available data for November and 
December showed commercial permitting was higher in 
the core cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul, but lower 
across most of the District’s other metro cities. 
Residential construction was mixed. Minneapolis-St. 
Paul and Bismarck, N.D., saw healthy year-end 
increases for both single- and multi-family units. But 
residential activity elsewhere was flat or declined over 
the same period. 
Commercial real estate increased slightly since the last 
report. Vacancy rates in multi-family units continued to 
be low throughout the District despite healthy 
construction activity. Similar market conditions existed 
for industrial space in Minneapolis-St. Paul. Large 
retailers continued to be pressured, with multiple big-box 
store closures across the District. Residential real estate 
was mixed. November home sales grew modestly over 
the previous year in western Wisconsin, Sioux Falls, 
S.D. and Missoula, Mont., but fell across Minnesota as 
well as in Bozeman and Great Falls, Mont.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the previous report. Respondents to the 
Minneapolis Fed’s annual manufacturing survey 
indicated growth in orders, production, employment, 
capital investment, and productivity over the past year, 
with expectations for further growth in 2019. An index of 
manufacturing conditions produced by Creighton 
University indicated increased activity in December in 
Minnesota and the Dakotas. A producer of electrical 
transmission equipment broke ground on a large new 
plant in South Dakota.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
Agricultural conditions in the District were stable at low 
levels. District oil and gas drilling activity slowed notably 
recently in response to a rapid decline in the price of 
crude oil. An industry contact reported that expectations 
for capital expenditures in the Bakken oil patch have 
shifted downward dramatically. However, as of late 
December, the drilling rig count in the region was 
unchanged from a month earlier. District iron ore mines 
were operating at near capacity, with a recent estimate 
suggesting 2018 production would be up slightly from the 
previous year. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity was roughly flat in December and early January, as growth in several sectors was offset 
by a slowdown in others. Moving forward, expectations were mostly positive for growth in the months ahead. Retail 
sales were strongly above year-ago levels, but growth in overall consumer spending was tempered by lower auto, res-
taurant, and tourism sales. Manufacturing activity edged up since the last survey period, and contacts expected modest 
increases in capital spending in the coming months. Sales rose at a modest pace in the professional and high-tech and 
wholesale trade sectors but fell modestly in the transportation sector. Residential real estate activity declined modestly, 
while overall activity in the commercial real estate sector rose slightly. Energy activity eased slightly since the previous 
survey period, and price expectations for crude oil declined further due to an increase in supply and rising global ten-
sions. The District agricultural outlook remained weak despite slight gains in some commodity prices. Employment and 
employee hours rose across most industries in the District, and additional gains were anticipated in the months ahead. 
Wages expanded at a modest pace and were expected to grow at a similar pace moving forward. District prices rose 
further, and gains in input prices continued to slightly outpace those of selling prices. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment across the District rose modestly in Decem-
ber and early January, and employee hours edged up. 
Employment and employee hours were expected to 
pickup modestly in the months ahead. Respondents in 
the retail trade, wholesale trade, transportation, profes-
sional services, real estate, health services, restaurant, 
and manufacturing sectors noted rising employment and 
employee hours, while contacts in the auto sales and 
tourism sectors reported a decline. Contacts in the ener-
gy sector reported no change in employment levels, 
although slight gains were anticipated moving forward. 
A majority of respondents continued to report labor 
shortages for low- and medium-skill workers, including 
positions for retail sales, mechanics, technicians, truck 
drivers, restaurant staff, and specialized IT workers. 
Wages continued to expand at a modest pace since the 
previous survey period and were moderately above year-
ago levels. Wages were expected to continue their cur-
rent pace of growth in the months ahead.   
Prices  
District input prices were modestly higher since the 
previous survey period, while selling prices rose slightly. 
The pace of input and selling price growth was anticipat-
ed to accelerate in the months ahead. Input prices in the 
retail and restaurant sectors rose moderately, while 
selling prices expanded at a modest pace. Respondents 
in the transportation sector reported flat input and selling 
prices since the previous survey period, although both 
were strongly above year-ago levels. Manufacturers 
noted modest growth in raw material prices, while fin-
ished product prices held steady. Prices for finished 
products and raw materials in the manufacturing sector 
were expected to rise moderately moving forward.    
Consumer Spending 
Despite modestly higher retail sales, a decline in auto, 
restaurant and tourism sales weighed on overall con-
sumer spending compared to the previous survey period. 
However, contacts expected consumer spending to 
increase slightly in the coming months. Retail sales rose 
modestly compared to the previous survey period and 
were strongly above year-ago levels. Respondents noted 
seasonal items and lower-priced goods sold well, where-
as higher-priced items sold poorly. Auto sales fell mod-
estly since the previous survey period, although contacts 
expected sales to expand at a modest pace in the com-
ing months. In response to a question about projected 
capital spending, several auto contacts noted recent 
downward revisions to capital spending plans for 2019. 
Restaurant sales dropped moderately since the previous 
survey period, and contacts anticipated sales to decline 
modestly in the coming months. Tourism sales sank 
moderately compared to the previous survey period, but 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
were modestly above year-ago levels. One tourism 
respondent attributed some of the tumbling sales over 
the past six months to environmental factors, such as 
fires and drought seen throughout the summer in parts of 
the District.     
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity edged up compared to the previ-
ous survey period, and other business contacts noted 
mixed sales growth. Although factory activity continued 
to expand, the pace of growth slowed at both durable 
and nondurable goods plants due primarily to decreases 
in metals, electronics, and petroleum/coal products. The 
level of production and shipments fell slightly whereas 
new orders and inventories expanded slightly since the 
previous survey period. Production, shipments, invento-
ries and new orders each remained above year-ago 
levels, and manufacturers expected modest increases in 
capital spending in the coming months. 
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the wholesale trade 
and professional and high-tech sectors experienced 
modest increases in sales, while transportation firms 
reported a modest decline. In the coming months, trans-
portation firms anticipated moderate sales growth, and 
wholesale trade and professional and high-tech contacts 
expected strong sales growth.    
Real Estate and Construction  
Real estate activity in the District remained mixed as 
residential real estate activity declined modestly while 
commercial real estate activity rose slightly. Residential 
home sales fell at a moderate pace since the previous 
survey period, and home prices and inventories contin-
ued to rise. Residential sales were expected to be flat in 
the months ahead, while home prices and inventories 
were projected to rise further. Sales of low- and medium-
prices homes continued to outpace sales of higher-
priced homes. Residential construction activity declined 
slightly since the previous survey period but was antici-
pated to rise slightly moving forward. Activity in the com-
mercial real estate sector continued to expand at a slight 
pace as sales, prices, construction underway, and ab-
sorption rose, while vacancy rates and completions were 
flat. Contacts in commercial real estate expected addi-
tional slight gains in overall activity in the months ahead.      
Banking 
Bankers reported a slight increase in overall loan de-
mand compared to the previous survey period. Specifi-
cally, respondents reported a slight increase in the de-
mand for commercial and industrial loans. Demand for 
commercial real estate loans held steady, while demand 
for residential real estate loans, consumer installment, 
and agricultural loans fell. Bankers indicated no change 
in loan quality compared to a year ago and expected a 
slight decline in loan quality over the next six months. 
Credit standards remained largely unchanged in all 
major loan categories, and bankers reported a modest 
increase in deposit levels.   
Energy 
Energy activity eased slightly since the last survey peri-
od, but production of oil and natural gas remained at 
high levels. The overall number of active oil rigs across 
the District was steady, as the number of rigs increased 
in Kansas and Wyoming and moderated slightly in Okla-
homa. The natural gas rig count was relatively flat since 
the previous survey period. Crude oil inventories re-
mained well above their five-year average, while natural 
gas stocks dipped lower. In December, crude oil prices 
continued to fall, though more slowly than in November. 
Price expectations for crude oil were down due to an 
increase in supply and rising global tensions. In addition, 
District energy contacts reported lower capital spending 
expectations for 2019 as a result of the recent decline in 
oil prices.    
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy remained weak despite 
a slight improvement in prices of some agricultural com-
modities. In the crop sector, prices increased slightly 
from the prior period. Corn and wheat prices were slight-
ly higher than year-ago levels, but soybean prices re-
mained lower as uncertainty surrounding trade persisted. 
Although good yields contributed to higher 2018 corn 
and soybean production in Nebraska, below average 
yields in Missouri could put downward pressure on farm 
income. Cotton prices fell sharply since the prior period 
on expectations of lower ginning activity which, com-
bined with lower 2018 production in Oklahoma due to 
poor yields, could also reduce revenues. In the livestock 
sector, cattle prices increased slightly compared to the 
previous survey period while hog prices were slightly 
lower.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Expansion in the Eleventh District economy slowed to a more modest pace over the reporting period. While the level of 
activity generally remained healthy, growth decelerated broadly across the manufacturing, services, retail, and energy 
sectors. Loan volumes declined slightly and new home sales fell modestly. Conversely, ample soil moisture has boosted 
crop conditions and improved prospects for the agricultural sector this year. Employment expanded, albeit at a slightly 
slower pace, despite continued widespread labor shortages. Wage growth remained elevated, while price growth abated 
to more normal levels. Outlooks were notably less optimistic than in the previous report due to declining oil prices, politi-
cal and trade uncertainty, higher interest rates, and stock market volatility. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued but slowed slightly over 
the reporting period, and labor market tightness persist-
ed. Contacts continued to note a lack of available work-
ers, both high skilled and low skilled, with specific men-
tions of shortages in construction, energy, hospitality, 
health care, banking, and transportation (truck drivers 
specifically).  
Wage growth had been on the rise for most of 2018 but 
eased toward yearend in several sectors, while still 
remaining elevated. Numerous contacts said workers 
were expecting higher pay, and many raised wages by   
3-10 percent in response. One contact implemented a 
higher minimum wage to reduce employee turnover and 
attract higher-quality applicants. Firms responding to 
special questions on wages reported 4.5 percent annual 
wage growth in 2018, on average, with expectations of 
growth slowing to 4.0 percent in 2019. 
Prices 
Input price growth abated to more moderate levels 
across most industries in December. Oil producers re-
ported relatively stable costs due to rising supplies of 
local sand and ongoing improvements in operational 
efficiency. Over the reporting period, selling price growth 
moderated: falling to a more moderate pace in goods-
producing industries but remaining elevated in the ser-
vice sector. Overall, most district firms were not able to 
raise selling prices fully in step with cost increases. Only 
about a quarter of the more than 300 Texas business 
executives surveyed said they were able to pass on to 
customers most or all of their cost increases. A durable 
goods manufacturer noted difficulty competing with 
foreign companies not facing the same raw materials 
tariffs. Margins at oilfield services firms continued to be 
under pressure from high costs and increasing competi-
tion. 
Manufacturing  
Over the reporting period, output growth continued to 
abate slightly for both durables and nondurables manu-
facturing. The Texas manufacturing sector ended 2018 
with modest growth, a downshift from the more robust 
expansion seen earlier in the year. Lower fuel prices 
boosted demand among petroleum refineries. 
Outlooks among manufacturers turned slightly negative 
in December. Contacts pointed to declining oil prices, 
labor constraints, political uncertainty, higher interest 
rates, and reduced activity in the housing and energy 
sectors as factors restraining growth or damping out-
looks. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales expanded at a slower pace compared with 
the previous reporting period. Online sales growth picked 
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
up, while some contacts reported weakness in in-store 
sales. Auto sales weakened slightly, with a couple of 
contacts citing the negative effects of increasing interest 
rates, and one noting increased competition and price 
shopping by customers. Retailers along the border noted 
increased competition in Mexico’s retail market and thus 
fewer Mexican shoppers. Overall, outlooks in the retail 
sector were notably less optimistic at yearend 2018 than 
in the prior Beige Book. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Growth in the nonfinancial services sector slowed nota-
bly over the reporting period. The slowing was led by 
staffing services, where demand decelerated from very 
high levels and revenue declined for some firms. A few 
staffing contacts reported increased uncertainty and 
customers delaying hiring plans. Slight revenue reduc-
tions were also reported in the health care sector, with 
multiple contacts mentioning an erosion of pricing power. 
Reports from transportation services firms were mixed. 
Leisure and hospitality was a bright spot, with solid reve-
nue growth through yearend, and growth among profes-
sional, scientific, and technical services firms remained 
fairly stable.  
Firms’ outlooks deteriorated, with contacts citing soften-
ing oil prices, general market volatility, and political and 
trade uncertainty. 
Construction and Real Estate 
New home sales fell modestly since the last Beige Book, 
while reports on existing-home sales were mixed. Ongo-
ing construction delays, in part due to fall rains, were 
noted in Houston, and one contact said that builders and 
developers were adjusting to the new flood plain regula-
tions in the city. Outlooks were cautious, and builders 
were selective in signing new deals.   
Apartment demand was seasonally slow over the report-
ing period. Rent growth strengthened in Austin, re-
mained modest in Dallas and San Antonio, and slowed 
in Houston. Contacts continued to note some supply-
driven softness in rent growth at the high-end. Industrial 
and retail activity generally remained healthy. Office 
demand was mixed, with leasing most active for new 
Class A office space. 
Financial Services 
Loan volumes declined slightly over the reporting period, 
led by a reduction in residential real estate loan volumes. 
Loan pricing continued to increase but at a slightly faster 
pace. Deposit volumes rose notably. Outlooks were less 
optimistic than they were six weeks ago, as more than a 
third of contacts believe general business activity will be 
worse six months from now. Bankers cite oil prices, trade 
relations, increased interest rates, and uncertainties in 
U.S. and global markets among factors creating a more 
difficult lending environment. 
Energy 
Energy activity remained strong but growth slowed nota-
bly, and outlooks worsened. Drilling and completion 
activity were flat over the reporting period, while the 
inventory of uncompleted wells continued to grow due to 
lower oil prices and ongoing pipeline and transportation 
bottlenecks in the Permian Basin. Lower oil prices were 
a worry, and about half of energy firms lowered capital 
spending plans for 2019 in response, according to the 
Dallas Fed Energy Survey. However, most firms still 
believe their capital spending will be higher in 2019 
compared with 2018. On average, survey respondents 
expect the WTI oil price to be around $60 per barrel at 
yearend 2019—above the reported average breakeven 
price to profitably drill new wells. 
Agriculture 
Ample soil moisture has boosted agricultural producers’ 
outlook for 2019, although prices for several crops re-
main low. The new farm bill offers farmers greater flexi-
bility in choosing coverage options and reintroduced 
cotton as a covered commodity after it was removed in 
the 2014 farm bill. This cotton safety net is meaningful 
for many cotton growers as they secure financing for the 
upcoming crop season. Conditions in the livestock sector 
generally remained favorable, but milk prices have fallen 
over the reporting period and may cause strain on dair-
ies. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
November through December. Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and wage growth was moderate. Price 
inflation was flat. Sales of retail goods expanded moderately, while activity in consumer and business services was 
solid. Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened modestly, and conditions in agriculture deteriorated slightly. 
On balance, contacts reported that residential and commercial real estate market activity expanded at a solid pace. 
Lending activity ticked down. 
 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market remained tight. Contacts 
reported that worker shortages persisted across indus-
tries and skill levels. Nonetheless, several contacts 
reported an uptick in the pace of hiring. A major shipping 
and logistics business in Northern California hired more 
seasonal workers than usual in response to strong holi-
day demand. In the restaurant industry, a contact in the 
Pacific Northwest observed rising employment levels, 
while contacts in the Mountain West and Southern Cali-
fornia noted intense worker shortages that led one chain 
to cancel plans to open additional locations. A contact in 
the California banking industry increased employment as 
warranted by business demand but noted that future 
hiring plans would be sensitive to developments in the 
broader economy. 
Wage growth continued to increase moderately. Con-
tacts across the District observed intense compensation 
pressures for more highly skilled workers. Employers 
with vacancies in the information technology, cybersecu-
rity, and management fields continued to boost starting 
salaries to attract qualified candidates. Wages for lower-
skilled workers also rose moderately, due to brisk com-
petition and, in some cases, in reaction to imminent 
minimum wage increases in the new year. A Southern 
California contact in the business services sector report-
ed that training costs also increased as positions turned 
over more frequently given the tight job market.     
Prices  
Overall, price inflation was flat over the reporting period. 
Contacts in manufacturing and utilities observed upward 
pricing pressures due mainly to a further moderate 
pickup in the cost of metal inputs and higher financing 
costs for capital-intensive production. Food and bever-
age prices increased somewhat, reflecting higher labor 
costs at producers. The growth of building material pric-
es slowed a bit, due in part to noticeably lower lumber 
costs, which fell because of the moderation in the hous-
ing market. Lower oil prices resulted in reduced fuel 
surcharges at shipping and logistics businesses and a 
modest decline in the price of some petroleum-based 
inputs to manufacturing. In the agriculture sector, prices 
declined modestly as demand from abroad weakened in 
response to trade policy changes and the stronger dollar.            
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods expanded moderately. Contacts 
observed that a solid holiday shopping season bolstered 
retail activity over the reporting period, thanks in part to 
elevated consumer confidence and household wealth. A 
contact in the Pacific Northwest reported that demand at 
home-improvement stores increased further. In the food 
and beverage industry, a contact reported a modest 
increase in sales driven by increased demand for higher-
end products. Automotive sales in the Mountain West 
declined slightly, due in part to higher financing costs.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2019 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
was solid. Demand for shipping and logistics services 
continued to be strong. Demand for automotive repair 
services in the Mountain West picked up; one contact 
attributed the increase to drivers preferring to repair 
instead of replace their vehicles as financing costs in-
creased. A contact in Southern California observed a 
slight tick down in tourist activity.     
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened 
modestly overall. Contacts in Northern California report-
ed that activity in the semiconductor industry was solid, 
but they noted the potential for stock market turbulence 
to modestly limit new orders. Deliveries and new orders 
of commercial aircraft increased slightly from the same 
period last year. A contact in the Pacific Northwest ob-
served that demand for manufactured lumber products 
ticked down, due in part to somewhat slower growth in 
the housing market.    
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector deteriorated slightly. 
Many contacts cited trade policy changes and the appre-
ciation of the dollar as drivers of weaker sales in the 
sector. Demand from abroad for a variety of crops de-
clined noticeably, hurting profitability for certain growers 
across the District. A few contacts reported higher inven-
tory levels for crops such as soybeans and perishable 
fruits, while growers sought alternative markets for their 
products. A contact in California noted that the outlook 
for crop yields in the new year improved modestly after 
rainfall beat expectations over the reporting period.     
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate markets expanded solidly overall, though 
contacts continued to observe slightly slower growth in 
recent months, especially in the residential market. A 
contact in Eastern Washington reported that overall 
housing permits for construction were slightly lower on a 
year-over-year basis due to a drop in permits for multi-
family units, though single-family units registered a year-
over-year increase. In Oregon, housing inventory ticked 
up but was still very low by historical standards. A con-
tact in Southern California reported that shortages of 
more-affordable housing units persisted, while construc-
tion of higher-end apartment buildings continued despite 
flagging demand in that segment. A contact in Oregon 
noted that housing prices were up substantially on a year
-over-year basis, thanks in part to brisk demand from out
-of-state buyers looking for less expensive housing op-
tions.  
In the commercial real estate market, contacts generally 
noted solid construction activity and demand. Contacts in 
the Pacific Northwest observed strong building activity. 
In Eastern Washington, construction was under way on a 
major e-commerce distribution center. In Seattle, con-
tacts noted brisk activity in office construction and leas-
ing. Rents were stable at an elevated level, and contacts 
reported continued low vacancy rates.    
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked down over the reporting period. 
Growth in loan demand slowed slightly, with contacts 
generally attributing most of the moderation to higher 
interest rates. At the same time, for many banks, com-
petitive pressures in loan and deposit pricing increased 
and net interest margins narrowed. Most contacts report-
ed that credit quality remained healthy. A few observed 
that lending standards loosened modestly.  ■ 


