The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
April 15, 2020 
April 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

National Summary 
    1 
Boston 
A-1
First District 
New York 
B-1
Second District  
Philadelphia 
C-1
Third District  
Cleveland 
D-1
Fourth District 
Richmond 
E-1
Fifth District  
Atlanta 
F-1
Sixth District 
Chicago 
G-1
Seventh District  
St. Louis 
H-1
Eighth District 
Minneapolis 
I-1
Ninth District  
Kansas City 
J-1
Tenth District 
Dallas 
K-1
Eleventh District 
San Francisco 
L-1
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It 
characterizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a 
variety of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. 
Because this information is collected from a wide range of business 
and community contacts through a variety of formal and informal 
methods, the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional 
information gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, 
economists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular 
summary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to 
businesses and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston based 
on information collected on or before April 6, 2020. This document 
summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal 
Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal 
Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity contracted sharply and abruptly across all regions in the United States as a result of the COVID-19 
pandemic. The hardest-hit industries—because of social distancing measures and mandated closures—were leisure 
and hospitality, and retail aside from essential goods. Most Districts reported declines in manufacturing, but cited 
significant variation across industries. Producers of food and medical products reported strong demand but faced both 
production delays, due to infection-prevention measures, and supply chain disruptions. Some other manufacturing 
industries, such as autos, mostly shut down. The energy sector, suffering from low prices, reduced investment and 
output. Districts reporting on loan demand said it was high, both from companies accessing credit lines and from 
households refinancing mortgages. All Districts reported highly uncertain outlooks among business contacts, with most 
expecting conditions to worsen in the next several months. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment declined in all Districts, steeply in many cases, as the COVID-19 pandemic affected firms in many 
sectors. Employment cuts were most severe in the retail and leisure and hospitality sectors, where most Districts 
reported widespread mandatory closures and steep falloffs in demand. Many Districts said severe job cuts were 
widespread, including the manufacturing and energy sectors. Contacts in several Districts noted they were cutting 
employment via temporary layoffs and furloughs that they hoped to reverse once business activity resumes. The near-
term outlook was for more job cuts in coming months. No District reported upward wage pressures. Most cited general 
wage softening and salary cuts except for high-demand sectors such as grocery stores that were awarding temporary 
“hardship” or “appreciation” pay increases. 
Prices 
The general direction of price inflation was down for both selling prices and non-labor input prices, as Districts reported 
either slowing price growth, flat prices, or modest to moderate declines in prices on balance. These trends were seen 
as reflecting weaker demand for many goods and services in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. Four Districts also 
reported further declines in energy prices. In contrast, supply chain disruptions and shifts in the composition of demand 
led to significant price increases for some essential services—such as freight—and some agricultural commodities and 
consumer goods. While expectations concerning agriculture prices were mixed, the outlook calls for further downward 
pressure on prices on average. 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Boston 
Economic activity slowed markedly in March, except 
among manufacturing firms in the region whose products 
saw increased demand because of the pandemic. 
Retailers and tourism contacts cited dramatic fall-offs in 
demand and they laid off customer-facing workers. 
Software and IT services firms continued to see strong 
demand, but few new customers. Real estate activity in 
the region paused in March. 
New York 
The regional economy deteriorated sharply since the 
last report, with many companies implementing partial 
temporary shutdowns and widespread staff reductions, 
and some reducing wages. Selling prices were flat to 
down modestly. The leisure & hospitality and retail 
sectors were particularly hard hit, while the wholesale 
trade and information sectors showed more resilience. 
Financial firms reported weaker activity. 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Business activity fell severely during the current Beige 
Book period, as the COVID-19 pandemic gripped the 
mid-Atlantic. No sector was spared. Rapidly rising 
joblessness has not made hiring easier, as contagion 
fears and child care needs keep workers at home. Prices 
tend to be falling, but the wage path is muddied, and firm 
outlooks are clouded by uncertainty.  
Cleveland 
Economic conditions deteriorated rapidly in the second 
half of March as COVID-19 mitigation efforts curbed 
demand across a wide array of industries. In response, 
firms sought to conserve cash by cutting staff and capital 
spending. Looking forward, business contacts generally 
expected conditions to worsen further in coming months. 
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy contracted as negative effects 
of the coronavirus outbreak were reported across most 
segments of the economy, leading to many businesses 
to scale back operations and employment. The few 
positive reports mainly came from producers and 
transporters of essential supplies. Overall, employment 
declined sharply and price growth remained muted.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity declined, and the labor market 
deteriorated due to COVID-19. Non-labor costs 
remained stable. Retail sales for non-discretionary 
products grew as sales of non-essential items fell. 
Tourism and hospitality contacts reported significant 
declines in activity. Housing activity softened, and 
commercial real estate decelerated. Manufacturing 
declined, but new orders held steady. Banking activity 
was mixed. 
Chicago 
Economic activity declined, but the intensity of decline 
varied by industry. Consumer spending decreased 
sharply; business spending, construction and real estate 
activity, and manufacturing production decreased 
moderately. Retail and hospitality payrolls plunged. 
Wages edged up and prices were little changed. 
Financial conditions deteriorated substantially, as did 
prospects for agricultural income.  
St. Louis 
Economic activity has declined sharply since February. 
Many firms reported moderate to severe temporary 
layoffs, furloughs, or paid time off. Reports from District 
banks indicate substantial and widespread increases in 
demand for banking services. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity decreased sharply due to 
the pandemic. Employment fell significantly, and wage 
pressures declined as a result. While effects varied 
widely, most sectors contracted, with tourism and 
hospitality seeing effects sooner. Though designated an 
essential industry in most District states, many 
commercial construction projects were put on hold due 
to uncertainty about viability or supply chain disruptions.  
Kansas City 
After holding fairly steady in the first half of March, 
economic conditions declined sharply in recent weeks. 
Consumer spending slowed significantly as auto, 
restaurant and tourism sales plummeted. Manufacturing 
activity contracted sharply, and energy and agricultural 
sectors deteriorated as commodity prices fell sharply. 
Employment levels fell slightly, but layoffs accelerated 
late in the month.  
Dallas 
Economic activity contracted broadly, but declines were 
the steepest in energy, retail, and non-financial services. 
Home sales rose through mid-March but have dropped 
off since then. Employment fell sharply, resulting in 
downward wage pressures, and selling prices buckled 
amid falling demand for most products and services. 
Outlooks deteriorated rapidly as the economic impact of 
the coronavirus pandemic intensified. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District contracted 
notably. Employment declined due to virus related 
disruptions. Price inflation fell a bit. Sales of retail goods 
and vehicles fell precipitously, and consumer and 
business services activity declined sharply. The 
manufacturing sector contracted moderately, and 
activity in the agriculture sector slowed somewhat. The 
residential real estate market was mixed, but grew 
slightly overall. Lending actively declined moderately.  

A-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The coronavirus pandemic slowed business activity markedly in some First District sectors, notably retail and tourism, 
while having mixed effects on others, as of the end of March. Most responding retailers closed stores and saw sales 
drop significantly in recent weeks, while tourism plummeted. Software and information technology services firms 
reported first-quarter growth above expectations, but a sharp drop-off in orders from new customers. Almost all the First 
District manufacturers responding in this round said their sales were rising, in large part because of pandemic-related 
demand; a furniture maker, by contrast, shut down production because demand fell to zero. Commercial real estate 
activity halted abruptly across the region in March. First District residential real estate contacts expect March data to 
show a pause. Manufacturers had cautiously positive outlooks, but other sectors expressed considerable uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment and wage changes across sectors largely 
reflected demand patterns. The retailers who closed 
brick and mortar stores furloughed the store workers. 
Two retail contacts reported pay reductions for corporate 
staff; one progressively from 5 percent to 30 percent 
based on pay level, and the other 20 percent across the 
board, which came with a four-day work week rather 
than five. Only one manufacturer, a furniture maker who 
halted production, reported laying off workers. Most 
manufacturing contacts had not revised their 
employment plans as a result of COVID-19. A 
packaging firm said headcount fell but that was planned 
long before the pandemic. A frozen fish manufacturer 
was hiring to meet added demand but was concerned -- 
because they were union workers -- that the firm would 
not be able to reduce headcount when demand returned 
to normal. Employment at software and IT services firms 
remained steady through the first quarter, although most 
contacts reported plans to do replacement hiring only for 
critical roles as they moved into the second quarter. All 
the responding software and IT firms have moved to a 
work-from-home posture which, so far, has allowed 
them to maintain full employment and full salaries. 
Prices  
Contacts cited few changes in the pricing environment. 
No responding manufacturers noted any unusual pricing 
pressure. A frozen fish firm said that it eliminated 
substantial promotions in response to much stronger
demand, meaning that prices to consumers were higher. 
A drug company said that the COVID-19 pandemic led it 
to cancel a planned price increase. Despite pockets of 
softness in demand, software and IT services contacts 
said they currently had no plans to alter selling prices. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail respondents for this round mostly reported sub-
stantial drop-offs in sales, which were attributable to 
COVID-19 store closings. A contact who closed stores 
during the third week of March saw online sales 
quadruple in the final week of March, which had 
traditionally been a small portion of their total sales, but 
the increase did not fully offset the in-store decline. 
Another contact who closed stores in the third week of 
March reported a decrease in online sales of roughly 25 
percent. One contacted retail chain could keep all stores 
open, and their sales were up dramatically in the first 
three weeks of March; by contrast, sales in the final 
week of March dropped by mid-single-digit percentages 
from a year ago. An online retailer saw sales grow more 
than 50 percent as workers settled into working from 
home and demanded more home-office furnishings as 
well as other home goods. All contacts reported they 
had stronger sales in January and February than in 
recent years. 
Travel industry contacts reported that the volume of 
passengers and flights fell drastically in March. Hotel 
occupancy and room rates in the Boston area dropped 
dramatically throughout March as large conferences and 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

A-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
other travel plans were canceled. One tourism contact 
reported that coastal communities that rely on seasonal 
business are cautiously optimistic about a snap-back in 
visitors who are driving-distance away soon after 
advisories are lifted, reflecting pent-up demand from 
cancella-tion of planned vacations throughout the spring. 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of 11 firms contacted this cycle, 10 reported higher sales 
despite, or in many cases, because of the pandemic.  
The one exception was a furniture manufacturer who 
sells largely through company-owned stores; as of 
March 27, they had shut down manufacturing and closed 
all their retail stores because of COVID-19. Other 
contacts saw rising sales for a variety of reasons, most 
linked to COVID-19 and its associated effects on the 
economy. A frozen fish manufacturer and a cardboard 
box company attributed recent strong results to brisk 
sales in grocery stores. The fish company said that the 
increase in demand had left it with essentially no 
inventories. A toy company said sales were good 
because social distancing meant people were spending 
more time at home with children. A medical goods 
manufacturer had a ten-fold increase in orders for 
portable ventilators. A manufacturer of membranes used 
in ventilators and N-95 masks, not surprisingly, had 
strong sales. The membrane manufacturer also sells into 
the auto industry and said that declining auto production 
freed up production for the medical market.   
The outlook was generally positive. Even the furniture 
maker was hopeful that workers could return soon and 
was also investigating government programs for relief. 
Several contacts were generally optimistic but said they 
were more cautious than before the pandemic.  
Software and Information Technology Services 
Software and IT services firms reported growth that 
exceeded expectations for the first quarter, but indicated 
there was uncertainty looking ahead to the second 
quarter. Two contacts reported that first quarter 
revenues were up 20 percent to 24 percent year-over-
year, and all respondents noted strong demand in the 
first two months of 2020. During March, new bookings 
declined drastically across-the-board and one contact 
mentioned that they had zero new bookings for that 
month. While contacts remain cautious about 
maintaining cash flow, they plan to reduce operating 
expenses by limiting travel and canceling large annual 
events through the end of the year. Overall, firms 
expressed uncertainty regarding the duration of this 
downturn but remain cautiously hopeful in their 
relationships with existing customers and the decisions 
they have made to limit expenses going forward.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District had 
continued to strengthen before the COVID-19 outbreak 
but fell sharply afterwards. Before the outbreak, the 
Boston leasing market was robust in both the office and 
industrial sectors, and rents were increasing. In the 
Providence leasing market, vacancies were low and 
rents were steady. In the Greater Hartford area, both the 
leasing and investment sales markets were slow but 
steady. The COVID-19 outbreak began affecting com-
mercial real estate markets across the District in mid-
March, with a near-total freeze in new office leasing 
activity, collapse of some sales in progress, growing 
disturbances in credit markets, and steep declines in 
construction activity. Retail tenants were especially hard 
hit, enacting store closures and mass layoffs, and many 
have received at least temporary forbearance on rent 
payments. In contrast, the industrial sector experienced 
increased demand for warehouse space to support e-
commerce in response to the outbreak. Contacts on 
balance were cautious and observant, but all expressed 
significant concerns about the near-term outlook for 
commercial real estate activity in light of the COVID-19 
pandemic.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District 
continued to experience very low inventory levels in 
February (the latest data available for Rhode Island, 
Massachusetts, Boston, New Hampshire, and Maine, 
with no data available for Connecticut and Vermont). For 
single family homes, sales were up in February from a 
year earlier in Rhode Island and Maine but down in 
Massachusetts, Boston, and New Hampshire. For 
condos, sales rose in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and 
Boston while dropping moderately in New Hampshire 
and Maine. Median sales prices generally increased and 
inventory declined substantially for both single family 
homes and condos. Contacts from Rhode Island, 
Massachusetts, Boston, and Maine all noted that 
inventory levels have been “desperately” low. 
Contacts said they expect March 2020 data to show a 
pause in housing market activity caused by the 
COVID-19 outbreak, a pause they expect will continue 
throughout the pandemic-related economic slowdown.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy

B-1
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Second District economy deteriorated sharply in the latest reporting period, amidst widespread shutdowns related 
to the coronavirus pandemic. The job market weakened substantially, and wages were flat to lower. Businesses 
reported that input prices leveled off and that selling prices were flat to down modestly. Activity fell sharply in nearly 
every sector, except wholesale trade, where activity was essentially flat. Business contacts in manufacturing and most 
service industries also expressed fairly widespread pessimism about the outlook. In general, there is great uncertainty 
and concern about the duration of the coronavirus pandemic and its economic effects. Consumer spending has fallen 
sharply, with a significant proportion of purchases going online. Tourism and travel ground to a halt, with many hotels 
closing, and those still open seeing sharp drops in occupancy rates. Home sales and rentals, commercial leasing, and 
construction activity have all largely stopped. Finally, financial sector contacts noted deteriorating conditions, and banks 
reported widespread weakening in loan demand, tighter credit standards, and higher delinquency rates but have been 
more lenient on existing loans.       
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has weakened sharply, as hiring 
largely stopped and layoffs were widespread. A major 
New York City employment agency, specializing in 
finance and professional services, noted that most 
activity has ground to a halt, but that they have not seen 
many layoffs other than temp workers. An upstate 
agency described it as business as usual for many 
essential businesses, while other businesses have 
eliminated their temporary staff and some have shut 
down. A major payroll firm noted that its business has 
remained steady but is expected to slip in the months 
ahead.  
Reports from business sectors were mostly quite 
negative to varying degrees. Contacts in manufacturing, 
retail, and leisure & hospitality reported particularly 
widespread staff reductions, while businesses in the 
information, finance, wholesale, and professional & 
business services indicated steady to modestly declining 
staffing levels. Many contacts noted that these 
reductions were largely furloughs or temporary layoffs.  
Looking ahead, contacts in manufacturing, finance, and 
professional & business services said they expect 
staffing levels to hold steady from current levels, but 
businesses across all other sectors expected further 
staff cuts, on net.   
Wages have been flat to lower since the last report. 
Businesses in the hard-hit leisure & hospitality and retail 
trade sectors reported fairly widespread reductions in 
wages, while contacts in other service industries 
indicated that wages were generally flat to down slightly.     
Prices  
Firms generally reported that input costs were flat, while 
their selling prices were steady to down modestly. 
Businesses in construction & real estate, finance, 
information, and leisure & hospitality noted declines in 
their selling prices, while firms in other industries 
generally reported steady prices. Looking ahead, 
businesses in most sectors projected that their prices 
would be little changed in the months ahead. However, 
information and finance businesses anticipated lower 
selling prices, while those in education & health services 
said they expect to raise prices modestly.  
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

B-2
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported widespread drops in sales in March, 
and the vast majority reported at least a partial 
temporary shutdown.  However, most do not anticipate a 
full shutdown, with many shifting to mostly or completely 
online sales.  Non-essential retail storefronts across the 
District were ordered to close in the latter part of March. 
Food and personal care stores tended to fare better but 
even these were seeing mixed results. Retailers 
expected sales to weaken further in the months ahead. 
Vehicle sales dropped to near zero in the second half of 
March, according to auto dealers in upstate New York, 
as the state shut down non-essential businesses. Many 
of these dealers hope to at least partially re-open before 
the end of April. While essential dealer service 
departments remained open, business for these 
services also slowed considerably. 
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported a widespread drop-off in 
business activity and new orders in recent weeks. 
Transportation firms also reported widespread declines, 
but wholesalers reported that activity was flat, on 
balance.  
Looking ahead, manufacturers said they expect activity 
to be unchanged from current levels, on balance, while 
wholesalers and transportation firms anticipate 
weakening activity. Businesses generally have slashed 
capital spending plans, with potential implications for 
some durable goods producers.    
Services 
Service industry contacts reported weakening activity to 
varying degrees. Leisure & hospitality business fell 
particularly sharply, as tourism plummeted and 
restaurants shut down for dining-in service. Health 
service contacts noted a comparably widespread drop-
off in activity and revenues. Businesses in education, 
professional & busi-ness services, and information 
reported more moderate, but still fairly widespread, 
declines in both activity and revenues. Contacts in all 
these sectors report that a majority of their staff is 
working from home—ranging from about half in leisure & 
hospitality to nearly everyone at information firms.  
Stay-at-home directives have largely brought both 
leisure and business travel to a halt. An expert on New 
York City’s tourism sector noted that almost nobody is 
visiting the city, and that New York City’s hotel 
occupancy fell from roughly 72 percent to 15 percent by 
the end of March. Many hotels have closed temporarily, 
while others have re-purposed some rooms as excess 
hospital space, and some as isolated office space. 
Looking ahead, business contacts expressed great 
uncertainty, though there was fairly widespread 
pessimism. Those in leisure & hospitality expressed the 
bleakest expectations, while those in professional & 
business services tended to be the least pessimistic.       
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales and rental markets across the District have 
largely paused, and many residential rental and sales 
listings have been removed, reflecting stay-at-home 
directives. Real estate agents were reclassified as 
essential in early April, though traffic has been weak and 
largely limited to virtual showings. 
A major appraiser noted that selling prices of New York 
City co-ops and condos were continuing to decline 
through mid-March, especially at the high end. Given the 
lack of activity since, though, it is difficult to gauge more 
recent changes in prices and rents. Landlords are 
reportedly concerned about how many tenants are going 
to be delinquent on their April rent—particularly in New 
York City, where a majority of residents are renters.   
Commercial real estate markets across the District have 
also ground to a halt, with office, industrial, and retail 
leasing activity largely ceasing. Office availability rates 
and rents have not changed noticeably thus far, but real 
estate contacts have noted concern about collecting rent 
from commercial tenants.  
New construction starts have essentially fallen to zero, 
and ongoing construction projects have paused, except 
where considered essential.  
Banking and Finance 
Financial service businesses have noted widespread 
declines in activity and revenues. Though only 
moderately pessimistic about the near-term outlook, 
finance sector contacts expressed widespread concern 
about maintaining adequate cash flow and collecting 
payables from customers. A majority of small-to-
medium-sized banks across the District reported lower 
loan demand across all categories. Bankers also 
reported tighter credit standards and narrowing loan 
spreads across the board. Higher delinquency rates 
were reported across all categories—particularly 
commercial & industrial loans. Bankers were also asked, 
in light of the coronavirus pandemic, if they had adopted 
more lenient policies on loan repayments. The vast 
majority said they had done so on residential mortgages, 
compared with about half on commercial & industrial 
loans, and a somewhat over half on commercial 
mortgages.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Third District business activity fell severely during the current Beige Book period, as the COVID-19 pandemic gripped 
the mid-Atlantic region. From March 19 through March 24, our three states ordered all nonessential businesses to close; 
by April 1, statewide stay-at-home orders were in place. As of March 29, over two-thirds of the firms reported that their 
new orders (or sales) had fallen in excess of 5 percent – one-fifth in excess of 30 percent – and one-fourth had shut 
down. Declines varied by sector; none were spared. Manufacturers were more likely to be essential and operating, but 
some closed after employees tested positive. Firms furloughed or laid off workers in record numbers. Still, contagion 
fears and at-home child care needs contributed to no-shows at existing jobs and kept workers from filling open jobs. The 
wage path is unclear – some firms offered hardship pay, while others imposed salary cuts. Price pressures eased as oil 
prices cratered and demand slumped. Uncertainty clouds outlooks as firms wait for the COVID-19 threat to subside.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment contracted sharply. At the end of March, 
one-fourth of the firms reported that they had shut down 
– a few shutdowns were permanent. In other responses 
to the crisis, one-half of the firms ceased all hiring. 
Employee furloughs, reductions of temporary or contract 
workers, and reductions of employees’ average work 
hours were mentioned in equal measure by one-fourth of 
the firms.
On average, payrolls of staffing firms’ placements ap-
pear to be down 40 to 50 percent across the District. 
Even business associated with essential food 
manufacturing and distribution was down over 10 
percent. A Pennsylvania contact noted that a food 
manufacturer shut down for two weeks after an employee 
tested positive. Some staffing firms have trimmed their 
own staff; others have guaranteed staff full pay through 
June.  
Multiple staffing contacts and firms from varied sectors 
reported that rising layoffs have not made it easier to 
attract and retain labor. Contagion fears and at-home 
child care needs have led some workers to stop showing 
up for work; those concerns plus unemployment benefits 
are also keeping workers from seeking other jobs.  
Firms have reported a mix of wage strategies. Some 
firms reduced pay for their executives and/or managers; 
some issued annual raises and bonuses early. Other 
firms have added “appreciation” pay or “hazard” pay for 
hourly workers who must still report to work. Many sala-
ried workers can telecommute – three-fourths of the 
firms noted an increase in their use of telecommuting. 
Contacts expect wage growth to moderate in the future. 
Prices 
In contrast to wages, firms were more unified in their 
belief that prices were stabilizing, if not falling. At mid-
March, firms reported moderating prices compared with 
the prior period. Since then, prices have eased further. 
Aside from occasional price gouging, most commodity 
prices have stabilized; some construction materials have 
begun to fall. Contacts pointed to low oil prices and 
slumping demand as factors supporting their expecta-
tions that prices would moderate further.  
Manufacturing 
As March progressed, manufacturers reported weaker 
new orders – resulting in a moderate overall decline. At 
mid-March, one-half of the firms reported no change; of 
the remainder, twice as many noted decreases as noted 
increases. By the end of March, one-third of the firms 
reported no change; of the remainder, five times as 
many noted decreases (or shutdowns) as noted 
increases. Almost one-fifth of the firms saw orders drop 
by more 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

C-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  
than 30 percent of prior expectations. Nearly one in 10 
firms shut down.  
According to several firms with global perspectives, 
supply chain issues with China have eased, and China is 
mostly back to work. One contact did note that a few 
plants shut down again, as demand from foreign custom-
ers waned. These contacts noted substantial declines of 
demand in southern Europe and several weakening 
sectors across the U.S., including oil field services, light 
metals, and food production and distribution that was 
oriented toward restaurants and group dining facilities.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail sales plummeted, as a majority of retail 
stores and restaurants closed, plus essential stores and 
takeout restaurants faced limited demand under 
statewide stay-at-home orders. One food and beverage 
chain furloughed 700 employees without pay or benefits; 
another lost 90 percent of its usual sales overnight – it 
hopes to grow its takeout service to recoup a fraction of 
its sales. Two food-oriented retail chains were able to 
stabilize sales with losses of 30 percent or less.  
Sales of new and used cars appear to have fallen by as 
much as 50 percent from February to March. From 
March 19 through March 26, our three states ordered 
dealers to stop sales, although they permitted selling 
parts and servicing vehicles. Delaware and New Jersey 
subsequently allowed limited sales. 
Tourism has virtually stopped. A majority of hotels, re-
sorts, and attractions have reported closing and laying 
off tens of thousands of employees. Most of Atlantic 
City’s 26,450 casino workers were laid off when the 
casinos were shut down. As of March 28, a tourism 
analyst estimated that weekly travel spending had fallen 
80 percent in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, and 70 
percent in Delaware.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Like manufacturers, broad service sectors also reported 
weaker new orders/sales as March progressed – result-
ing in a severe overall decline. At mid-March about one-
fourth of the firms reported no change; of the remainder, 
one and a half times as many noted decreases as noted 
increases. By the end of March, a tenth of the firms 
reported no change; of the remainder, six times as many 
noted decreases (or shutdowns) as noted increases. 
Almost one-fifth of the firms saw orders drop by more 
than 30 percent of prior expectations. Nearly one in three 
firms shut down.  
Financial Services 
By March 25, reports from financial firms were starting to 
show signs of financial stress among firms and house-
holds. Volumes of credit card debt and of auto loans 
began falling after March 11. In contrast, over the same 
two weeks, volumes grew rapidly for two lending catego-
ries in which firms and households are able to draw 
down on or request extensions of existing lines of credit: 
commercial and industrial loans and home equity lines.  
Commercial real estate lending and home mortgages did 
not appear to be impacted yet. Bankers and brokers 
indicated that most deals that were already scheduled 
were completed. However, contacts expect fewer deals 
to be brought to the table going forward.  
Banking contacts were busy negotiating loan modifica-
tions and loan deferrals, while deciphering new Small 
Business Administration rules and other programs avail-
able in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Secu-
rity Act recovery package, as fast as the regulations 
were being written. The bankers stated that liquidity was 
not a problem but would be a concern if the shutdown 
dragged on.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders were sidelined in Pennsylvania, but con-
struction continued in Delaware and New Jersey. Never-
theless, projects were slowed by supply disruptions, 
transactions that were complicated by disrupted local 
government services, and a reluctant workforce facing 
contagion fears. Buyers have not canceled existing 
contracts, but new orders are nonexistent.  
Real estate firms also noted extra hurdles with title work 
and inspections required to close transactions. However, 
most scheduled closings were finalized. Showings and 
sales have dropped off considerably in Pennsylvania 
despite switching to virtual showings. Contacts note that 
activity has held up in Delaware.  
Philadelphia’s commercial real estate construction fell 70 
percent by the end of March – some contractors have no 
projects. After initially being shut down in Pennsylvania, 
commercial construction was allowed an exemption. 
Unfortunately, worker attendance is less than 50 percent 
on some projects. On the commercial leasing side, ten-
ants are seeking lower rents, whether they need it or not. 
As with residential construction, deals already in the 
works have been finalized, but fewer new projects are 
coming forward now. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fourth District economy contracted sharply in the second half of March as business disruptions resulting from 
COVID-19 mitigation efforts spread quickly. Consumer spending decreased materially, with restaurants, tourism, and 
nonessential retail spending particularly hard hit. Residential realtors and builders noted that stay-at-home orders 
curbed walk-in traffic, and pending home sales fell. Meanwhile, many new nonresidential projects were delayed, and 
commercial realtors expressed concern that cash flow will suffer as tenants defer rent payments. Manufacturers’ orders 
declined amid virus-related work stoppages along with pullbacks in capital equipment spending. Banking and a few 
business services sectors saw activity pick up as a result of the pandemic, but, on balance, service sector activity was 
down. Reports from freight and logistics firms were mixed. Looking forward, contacts generally expected economic 
conditions to worsen further in coming months. Consequently, many planned to conserve cash by reducing capital 
spending and cutting staffing levels in the months ahead. Weakening demand across industries generally resulted in 
less upward pressure on costs and prices.  
Employment and Wages 
Fourth District employment fell significantly in recent 
weeks as firms realigned their staff with suddenly dimin-
ished demand for their goods and services. There was 
very little new hiring taking place, and contacts in most 
industries reported cutting hours, staff, or both. Of those 
firms that were cutting staff, the majority indicated that 
they were furloughing workers rather than firing them 
outright, with the hope of bringing them back once busi-
ness activity resumes. Employers appeared eager to do 
everything in their power to help underutilized workers. 
Many reportedly increased wages temporarily for essen-
tial workers whose hours had been cut, while others 
were extending healthcare benefits to furloughed work-
ers or offering them help finding new employment. 
Banks, grocery stores, and health services firms were 
among the few industries that were not cutting back on 
staffing. Outside of the temporary pay increases, upward 
wage pressures generally diminished. Looking forward, 
greater than one in two surveyed firms expected staffing 
levels to fall in coming months, compared to fewer than 
one in 10 that expected them to rise.   
Prices 
Selling prices generally declined in recent weeks, while 
nonlabor input costs increased at a noticeably slower 
pace. For the first time since late 2015, more contacts 
reported that selling prices had declined compared to 
those who said they had increased. Those who said that 
prices decreased generally cited reduced demand result-
ing from COVID-19 mitigation efforts. While this trend 
was evident across most industries, it was particularly 
pronounced among nonessential retailers, many of 
which had been seeing increased pricing power during 
the past several reports. By contrast, freight haulers 
noted higher selling prices. At the same time, a consider-
ably smaller share of contacts reported higher prices for 
nonlabor input costs compared to the prior Beige Book 
period. While firms in most industries expected cost 
pressures to remain muted in coming months, some 
manufacturers and construction contacts said that supply 
chain disruptions may push prices up for some materials. 
Consumer Spending 
Retail activity in the Fourth District declined sharply as a 
result of social distancing measures taken to mitigate the 
spread of COVID-19. With a large number of dine-in 
restaurants and nonessential retailers ordered to close, 
many establishments lost a significant portion of their 
expected revenue. A national restaurant group indicated 
that revenues were lower by 60 percent year over year, 
even as stores remained open for takeout and delivery, 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

D-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland  
while a smaller regional holding group shut down all of 
its establishments because costs far exceeded reve-
nues. Meanwhile, one luxury auto dealer reported that 
while its doors remained open with reduced hours, it had 
not sold a car in the second half of March. By contrast, a 
handful of essential grocery stores saw a large spike in 
demand recently as consumers stocked up on food and 
home supplies. Contacts in the retail sector generally 
expected economic distress to persist into the summer, 
followed by a slow and gradual recovery.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing conditions worsened as more than half of 
contacts reported that demand had declined during the 
last two months. Contacts noted a pullback in capital 
spending along with work stoppages because the spread 
of COVID-19 reduced orders. Several contacts noted in 
particular that the two-week shutdown of US auto 
production would have ripple effects throughout their 
supply chains. More than a third of manufacturers 
reported that capacity utilization was below a normal 
range because demand had weakened and because 
employees were increasingly missing work because of 
illness, concern about the virus, and school closures. 
Although a few contacts noted an uptick in demand 
because of precau-tionary behavior, they expected that 
demand would drop off in the future as customers work 
through their built-up inventory.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Reports from realtors and builders (residential and non-
residential) indicated that activity fell sharply in mid-
March. On the residential side, real estate professionals 
suggested that sales in 2020 had been off to a very 
strong start through the first half of March, but they 
weakened subsequently. Thus, while existing home 
sales were relatively robust in the first quarter, pending 
sales fell notably in March. Builders indicated that work 
on homes under contract continued, although sales had 
slowed. However, one builder noted that cancellation 
rates had increased, and another was concerned that 
homes under contract may not close in coming months if 
rising unemployment befalls some of his buyers. Non-
residential real estate professionals indicated that 
demand fell recently. Moreover, several contacts 
suggested that tenants have reached out to ask for rent 
deferrals or concessions. Nonresidential builders 
reported that work continued on large projects that were 
underway in areas that allowed it, but they have seen 
some job postponements and cancellations. Contacts 
on both the residential and nonresidential sides 
expected demand to weaken further in coming months. 
Financial Services 
Loan demand grew substantially; one banker described 
it as “unprecedented,” saying that one-month growth was 
likely to match what would typically be expected in a 
year. Corporate clients drew down credit lines to keep 
cash on hand in light of COVID-19-related revenue 
shocks, while consumers rushed to refinance home 
mortgages at lower rates. This activity largely offset 
declines in demand for auto loans. Delinquency rates 
remained low as banks worked to assist clients in these 
unusual times, although many contacts speculated that 
delinquency rates will climb in the coming months as 
economic duress persists.  
Professional and Business Services 
Contacts in the professional business services sector 
reported a significant decline in demand for their 
services in recent weeks. Multiple firms indicated that 
clients have delayed the implementation of new projects 
in addition to cancelling some projects already 
underway. However, there were a couple of firms that 
provide legal, human resources, and online commerce 
consulting services that reported an increase in demand 
in recent weeks. Overall, the majority of firms 
interviewed expected economic conditions to remain 
significantly subdued through the second quarter.  
Freight 
Reports from the freight sector were mixed. While freight 
activity as a whole had declined since the onset of 
COVID-19, firms that ship consumer staples such as 
food, cleaning supplies, and medical supplies saw a 
significant increase in demand. However, freight firms 
that typically ship manufactured or imported goods 
continue to see reduced volumes. Because 
manufacturing output is expected to remain weak and 
the elevated demand for consumer staples is expected 
to wane, contacts in the freight sector generally 
anticipated that business conditions will worsen further 
in the second quarter.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions 
visit: www.clevelandfed.org/region/

E-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Fifth District economic activity declined across many sectors, quite sharply in some, due in large part to the measures 
taken by businesses and consumers to slow the spread of the coronavirus outbreak. Manufacturers reported a slowdown 
in shipments and new orders but most were able to keep plants open, albeit at lower levels of production. Producers of 
essential supplies and food saw an increase in demand. Port contacts reported a moderate decline in import volumes, 
particularly from China and Europe. Trucking companies saw steady demand as the decline in retail shipments was offset 
by increases in shipments for other essential supplies. Retail, travel, and tourism firms saw sharp declines in demand and 
occupancy rates and many restaurants closed or shifted to take-out or delivery only. Residential real estate contacts 
reported a slowdown in foot traffic and sales while new home construction faced delays. Commercial real estate leasing 
fell and some tenants looked to break leases or sought relief due to economic hardship. Bankers, on the other hand, saw 
a moderate increase in demand, mainly coming from residential construction and refinance loans. On balance, 
nonfinancial services firms saw a modest decline in revenue. Some farmers reported increased demand and more 
favorable selling prices. Low oil and natural gas prices led energy companies to reduce activity. Employment fell sharply, 
overall. Price growth remained muted.  
Employment and Wages 
On balance, employment declined sharply; however, 
individual firm experiences varied considerably. Some 
manufacturers cut production and reduced staff. Others, 
such as food and personal care products manufactu-
rers, increased hours and employment in response to 
stronger demand. Some business-to-business services 
firms reduced weekly hours for employees and cut 
temporary positions. Many consumer facing businesses 
like hotels, restaurants, and retail shops reduced staff 
sharply due to steep declines in demand owing to social 
distancing guidelines. An outdoor recreation establish-
ment said that they normally hire three to four hundred 
seasonal staff at this time of year but right now all hiring 
was on hold. No changes to wages were reported.  
Prices 
Overall, price growth remained muted since our 
previous report. According to our most recent surveys, 
manufacturers reported a slight deceleration in growth 
of prices paid.  A couple of producers pointed to recent 
declines in oil and gas prices as contributing factors to 
slower input price growth. Service sector firms saw an 
acceleration in growth of prices paid and prices 
received. Some agricultural commodity prices, such as 
soy, wheat, beef, poultry, and eggs rose, in recent 
weeks.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers in the Fifth District reported declines in 
shipments and new orders since our last report. Many 
manufacturers had drops in demand resulting from 
retailers closing, which led some firms to slow 
production. Manufacturers also experienced supply 
chain disrup-tions, involving inputs from China or 
Europe. Some were hopeful that supply from China 
would improve soon but were concerned that demand 
would decrease further in the U.S. A cabinet 
manufacturer had a sharp drop in demand, and made 
plans to consolidate and downsize operations. A food 
manufacturer, on the other hand, experienced strong 
demand.  
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District port volumes fell moderately since our last 
report, driven largely by a decline in imports, especially 
from China and Europe. Import levels continued to 
exceed export levels although the gap between the two 
narrowed. Exports remained strong, particularly 
agricultural products and lumber. Despite softer imports, 
inventories built up at ports as companies, particularly 
car dealers, refused deliveries. Port revenues were hurt 
by the cancellations of cruises. However, a Fifth District 
airport saw a slight increase in international cargo flights, 
which was attributed to a decrease in passenger flights 
on which some goods are normally transported. 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

E-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  
Fifth District trucking companies reported fairly steady 
business in recent weeks as declines in retail shipments 
were offset by increased demand from other parts of the 
market. Shipments of food, laptops, and cigarettes were 
particularly high. Spot market rates rose slightly as 
demand shifted across sectors. Some companies strug-
gled to find enough drivers, as a small number of drivers 
were quarantined and newly trained drivers could not 
get their licenses while the DMV was closed. Also, low 
fuel prices helped lower operating costs.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Fifth District retail sales declined sharply since our last 
report. Many stores were forced to close, and others 
saw decreased demand. Retailers looked for creative 
ways to remain open. A clothing store allowed for 
appointment-only in-store shopping, and a florist 
switched to curbside pickup. Stores lowered prices and 
offered free shipping to attract customers and move 
inventories. Grocery store sales increased. They added 
workers to stock shelves and warehouses, but struggled 
to main-tain inventories. Retailers that remained open 
also re-ported increased cleaning efforts. 
The tourism industry contracted significantly in the Fifth 
District in recent weeks. Hotel occupancy fell to 
unprecedented levels, leading several hotels to close 
and others to operate with minimal staff. However, some 
people continued to visit rentals and vacation homes. 
Many restaurants closed when dining in was disallowed, 
while others tried to remain open for take-out and 
delivery. For many restaurants, especially those not 
structured for takeout, this was not a long term solution 
but a way for them to sell their perishable inventory.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Fifth District home sales declined modestly in recent 
weeks. Buyer traffic decreased, but some who viewed 
houses were serious about buying quickly. Inventory 
levels remained low, as showings decreased since 
prospective sellers were reluctant to let others into their 
homes. Builders worried about excess inventories if 
demand slowed further. Sale prices and days on the 
market held fairly steady. Construction projects 
continued but at a slower pace, and new starts fell. One 
realtor mentioned that appraisals and inspections were 
delayed as fewer workers were in the field. 
Fifth District commercial real estate leasing decreased 
moderately since our last report. Office and retail leasing 
declined sharply as companies reported no new leases. 
Existing office and retail tenants looked to break leases 
or asked for rent reductions and deferments, with many 
claiming force majeure. However, industrial leasing 
remained fairly strong, as companies looked for extra 
storage space for accumulating inventories during tem-
porary closures. Brokers reported mixed conditions in 
multifamily. Existing construction projects continued, but 
new construction starts declined.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan demand grew moderately mainly due to an 
increase in construction financing and mortgage 
refinance loans. Respondents indicated tepid demand 
for commercial real estate and C&I loans, though several 
banks mentioned that they anticipate strong demand for 
CARES Act SBA loans. Auto loans declined sharply in 
recent weeks. Most banks reported that deposits grew 
moderately despite lower interest rates paid on all 
accounts; however, they also reported rate compression. 
Financial institutions noted that credit standards, 
delinquencies, and credit quality remained solid; 
however, they expect an uptick in delinquency rates 
within the next 60 days due to deterioration in the 
economy caused by the coronavirus outbreak.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Overall, nonfinancial services firms indicated a modest 
decline in revenue and demand in recent weeks, which 
many attributed to the coronavirus outbreak. Several 
business-to-business service providers said that clients 
were putting work on hold or delaying new projects. An 
HR outsourcing firm in Northern Virginia said that only 
about half of their field staff had security clearances to 
work remotely, thereby reducing billable hours. In 
contrast, a law firm said that they saw an increase in 
business as clients were looking for help understanding 
recently passed coronavirus aid legislation. 
Natural Resources 
Reports from agriculture and energy contacts were 
mixed. Some farmers reported increased demand from 
grocery stores and rising commodity prices. One egg 
farmer said that this probably saved many farmers as 
selling prices had been depressed in recent months. 
Energy contacts, on the other hand, saw declines in 
extraction and new exploration due to sharp declines in 
oil and gas prices. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, economic activity in the Sixth District deteriorated from mid-February to late March, and the outlook dimin-
ished as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Labor market conditions weakened significantly as businesses reported 
widespread layoffs and furloughs. Nonlabor costs were stable. Retail contacts noted plunging sales of discretionary 
goods, and surges in spending on essential items. Hospitality and tourism contacts reported significant declines in activ-
ity as conventions were canceled and attractions were temporarily shuttered. Activity in residential and commercial real 
estate slowed somewhat. Manufacturing activity deteriorated, but new orders held steady or increased as a result of 
changes in product demand. Overall transportation activity declined. District bankers reported mixed conditions.  
Employment and Wages 
District labor market conditions deteriorated over the 
reporting period as the spread of COVID-19 precipitated 
a sharp contraction in activity leading to layoffs and 
furloughs, especially in retail, tourism and hospitality. 
Grocery, home improvement, and discount stores, along 
with home delivery services, experienced a surge in 
demand resulting in a strong increase in hiring. Growing 
restrictions on public gatherings forced many restaurants 
to pivot to take-out and delivery services in an effort to 
stay in business and preserve some jobs. Manufacturing 
and distribution workforces remained largely intact and 
those producing high-demand products indicated work-
ing longer hours. Most firms with the ability to do so 
transitioned to remote working. In response to a sharp 
drop in demand, the region’s energy sector experienced 
a contraction in employment. Some businesses noted 
actively working to connect laid-off or furloughed 
employees with firms that were hiring. 
Some District firms reported cutting pay, eliminating 
bonuses, and reducing hours, in efforts to retain 
employees. However, high demand sectors, such as 
grocery, distribution, and warehousing announced 
increases in hourly wages or bonuses. Some companies 
still hiring have postponed pre-employment background 
checks like drug tests and finger printing, largely in an 
effort to reduce physical contact. Many contacts reported 
relaxing attendance policies and increasing paid time off 
and leave allowances. Some noted an extension of 
premium pay to essential workers or employees who 
deal directly with the public. 
Prices 
Most contacts reported stable input costs over the 
reporting period with expectations that prices may drop 
as a result of lower overall demand due to the COVID-19 
pandemic. With considerable uncertainty regarding supply 
chains and demand, most sectors reported an effort to 
avoid raising prices. Oil price declines benefited 
businesses outside of the energy sector, helping defray 
the rising cost of freight. The Atlanta Fed’s Business 
Inflation Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit 
costs were up 1.6 percent in March, virtually unchanged 
from February. Over the next twelve months survey 
respond-ents, on average, indicated they expect unit 
costs to rise 1.9 percent. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retailers reported sales growth of grocery and 
household products, office equipment, and home 
improvement goods, which partially offset some of the 
steep decline in discretionary consumer spending activity 
due to COVID-19. E-commerce activity accelerated as 
brick-and-mortar sales plummeted. There were some 
reports of supply chain bottlenecking as high-traffic 
retailers such as grocers, big box, and warehouse chains 
struggled to manage the influx of shipments to fill empty 
shelves. 
Tourism and hospitality contacts reported a massive 
decline in activity across the District as a result of COVID 
-19. By mid-March, most major conferences and 
conventions had been cancelled or postponed, the 
majority of tourist attractions were temporarily shuttered, 
and hoteliers reported historically low occupancy rates. 
Several contacts noted that hotels with locations close to 
hospi-tals were being considered for conversion for 
medical use and shelters for COVID-19 patients or 
hospital staff.
Construction and Real Estate 
After a strong start to the year, District housing activity 
was significantly disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Contacts indicated that since their sales pipeline was 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

F-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta  
strong prior to the outbreak, recent transactions were 
solid and cancellations were muted. However, market 
participants anticipate a contraction in second quarter 
sales as in-person traffic and new sales activity declined 
significantly since early March. Expectations for potential 
disruptions in functions such as permitting, appraisals, 
deed filings, and notarizations due to social distancing 
were noted, and some reports indicated a tightening of 
credit and lending standards. Construction and develop-
ment activity slowed and builders began strengthening 
cash reserves and guarding balance sheets. 
Commercial real estate (CRE) contacts reported a decel-
eration in new leasing inquiries amid the COVID-19 
pandemic. However, leasing activity that was already in 
the pipeline appeared to be moving forward. Declining 
tourism and travel activity significantly impacted CRE in 
the hospitality and retail sectors. Investment property 
sales slowed markedly due to issues associated with the 
slowing of financing from commercial mortgage backed 
securities and non-bank lenders; however, contacts 
reported that capital was readily available at banks for 
the financing of CRE projects. Banks reported that origi-
nations continued in the CRE space. Reports of tenants 
seeking rent relief have begun to emerge. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing firms reported solid overall activity in late 
February, but indicated conditions rapidly deteriorated in 
early March due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite the 
decline in activity, some firms suggested that new orders 
were holding steady or even increasing due to changes 
in product demand. Supply delivery times were reported 
to be increasing. 
Transportation 
District transportation contacts continued to report vary-
ing levels of activity, and the majority noted some degree 
of negative impacts to business due to COVID-19. Activi-
ty for logistics, trucking, and freight brokerage firms held 
steady on average as consumer demand for discretion-
ary products declined and demand for essential items 
increased. However, according to railroad contacts, 
overall rail traffic fell by near double digits as compared 
with year-earlier levels, driven by declines in the move-
ment of grain, coal, aggregates and iron and steel scrap, 
and motor vehicles and parts. Intermodal traffic also fell. 
Air cargo contacts cited a continued deterioration in 
freight volumes over the reporting period. Sizeable de-
clines in revenue and massive shifts in costs, including 
implementing pay cuts across the board to help offset 
some of the revenue losses, were mentioned. Ports saw 
year-over-year declines in container activity as imports 
from Asia slowed, and significant declines in overall 
freight activity for the foreseeable future are anticipated . 
Banking and Finance 
Financial institutions expressed concerns about the 
potential increase in delinquencies and the impact on 
both earnings and capital due to uncertainties around the 
COVID-19 outbreak. Slower loan growth was reported 
and some indicated they were being more careful about 
underwriting, especially with residential and some com-
mercial real estate properties. Financial institutions re-
ported contacting customers in industries most affected 
by the pandemic to determine borrowers’ potential needs 
for accommodations. These industries included travel 
and hospitality, retailers, restaurants and their suppliers, 
transportation and logistics, and health care providers. 
Given declines in market value of some institutions, 
goodwill impairments were being considered. Liquidity 
remained stable. Some financial institutions reported 
growth in deposits while others experienced large cash 
withdrawals. 
Energy 
Global demand for crude oil and liquefied natural gas fell 
over the reporting period primarily as a result of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, in spite of the fall in oil prices. As a 
result of price declines, broad cost-cutting measures, 
including reductions in major capital spending plans, 
suspension of share buybacks, delays of onsite sched-
uled maintenance, hiring freezes, and the dismissal of 
contractors were reported. Industrial plant and construc-
tion contacts reported delays in some petrochemical new 
build and expansion projects. Utilities firms noted that 
power usage declines among commercial business lines 
were nearly offset by a spike in residential power usage, 
as people spend more time at home. Utilities firms antici-
pate a further drop in power demand, particularly from 
the industrial segment, as budget cuts make their way 
through the sector. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained mixed. Most of the 
District remained drought free, with the exception of 
much of Florida and other parts of the Gulf coastal re-
gion, which experienced abnormally dry conditions. On a 
month-over-month basis, the March production forecast 
for Florida's orange crop was down from both last 
month’s forecast and last year’s production while the 
grapefruit production forecast was down month-over-
month but remained ahead of last year's production. 
Contacts reported the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted 
in recent significant price increases for corn, rice, soy-
beans, milk and eggs, and an increase in demand for 
Florida oranges. Contacts also reported that some Dis-
trict states modified trucking weight and hour require-
ments in response to COVID-19, which has had a posi-
tive effect on getting product to market more quickly. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District declined in late February and March, as the spread of the coronavirus caused 
major economic upheaval. The intensity of the decline varied by industry, but contacts across industries expected a 
large decrease in activity over the next 3 months and expected the recovery to still be underway a year from now. 
Consumer spending decreased sharply; business spending, construction and real estate activity, and manufacturing 
production decreased moderately. Retail and hospitality payrolls plunged, though employment for most contacts was 
little changed. Wages edged up and prices were little changed. Financial conditions deteriorated substantially, as did 
prospects for agricultural income. 
Employment and Wages 
Many retail and hospitality contacts reported large 
layoffs, though employment for most Beige Book 
contacts was little changed over the reporting period. 
That said, contacts reported major changes in work 
environments. Manufacturers facing slowdowns often 
reported cutting workers’ hours, and many also planned 
to use the downtime to carry out maintenance or do 
productivity enhancing projects. There also were 
widespread reports of workers choosing to stay home 
for health safety reasons. Most nonessential workers 
who could began telecommuting. Overall, contacts 
expected a modest decline in employment over the 
next 3 months, with few looking to increase 
employment until the uncertainty created by the 
coronavirus abated some. Among those still looking for 
workers, challenges in filling positions persisted at all 
skill levels. Wages edged up, and contacts expected 
modest increases over the next 12 months. Benefit 
costs increased slightly. 
Prices 
Prices were little changed in late February and March, 
though contacts expected modest price increases over 
the next 12 months. Both retail and producer prices 
were flat overall. Input prices were largely unchanged, 
except for energy prices, which fell some.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending decreased sharply over the report-
ing period. Overall, nonauto retail sales declined 
considerably as the coronavirus crisis forced store 
closures across the District. Sales fell in most 
segments, particularly in apparel. In contrast, grocery 
and health and personal care stores saw dramatically 
higher demand, with numerous reports of runs on items 
such as household cleaners and toilet paper. E-
commerce also expanded significantly. Consumption of 
services fell precipitously, particularly in the hospitality, 
entertainment, and food service sectors as the 
coronavirus crisis led to reduced travel and prohibitions 
of large gatherings. Vehicle sales fell sharply and 
dealerships across the District closed. Vehicle service 
center activity also fell steeply. 
Business Spending 
Business spending decreased modestly in late 
February and March. Retail inventories were generally 
above comfortable levels after sales in most segments 
fell. There were, however, reports of extremely low 
inventories of some grocery and household products. 
Most manufacturers said that inventories were at 
comfortable levels. Capital spending declined some, 
and contacts expected spending to decrease slightly 
over the next 12 months. Outlays were primarily for IT 
equipment and intellectual property, 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

G-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
with numerous reports of spending to support 
telecommuting. Contacts also noted increased spending 
on sanitation and other protective health measures for 
workers. Demand for transportation services decreased 
slightly overall, as lower long distance volumes 
outweighed increases in local delivery services. 
Commercial and industrial energy consumption declined 
some, with lower usage reported from retail stores, 
restaurants, hotels, and auto manufacturers. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity decreased moder-
ately over the reporting period. Residential construction 
activity fell modestly. Contacts indicated that only a 
small share of projects had been delayed, though they 
ex-pected a large decrease in building when active 
projects are completed. Residential real estate activity 
decreased substantially. Showings were limited 
because wide-spread shelter-in-place orders meant 
homes could not be viewed publicly. One contact said 
that only sales that were under contract before the 
beginning of the coronavirus crisis were being complet-
ed. Nonresidential construction activity was little 
changed. Contacts indicated that, as with residential 
construction, most projects were continuing. A contact in 
southern Wisconsin reported greater demand from 
restaurants for remodeling work as owners anticipated 
eventually reopening. Commercial real estate activity 
decreased significantly, particularly for retail and office 
spaces. Contacts noted that there was strong pressure 
on landlords to give rent forbearance, but that landlords 
were having difficulty obtaining forbearance from their 
lenders. Contacts also noted that the commercial 
property purchase process had slowed because permits 
and titles were taking longer to obtain with government 
workers telecommuting. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production decreased moderately on net 
in late February and March. Auto production declined 
substantially as the coronavirus crisis led many assem-
blers and suppliers to shut down. Steel production 
slowed significantly, driven by large declines in autos, 
oil and gas, and construction. Demand for specialty 
metals decreased moderately, as reduced orders from 
autos and aerospace outweighed slight increases from 
the medical and defense industries. Orders for heavy 
trucks continued to decline from a peak at the end of 
last year. Food manufacturers reported a substantial 
increase in demand, as did manufacturers of shipping 
materials. Manufacturers of building materials saw a 
slight increase in shipments as greater demand from 
commer-cial builders more than made up for less 
demand from residential builders. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions deteriorated substantially over the 
reporting period. Participants in the equity and bond 
markets reported large increases in volatility and large 
decreases in liquidity across a wide range of asset cate-
gories. Business loan volumes decreased moderately 
as greater uncertainty led borrowers to hold off on new 
loan requests. That said, many businesses drew on 
existing lines of credit. Lenders also reported a large 
number of requests for loan payment deferrals. Lenders 
indicated that they were actively working to implement 
the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck 
Protection Program and expected a large volume of 
applications. Business loan quality deteriorated 
moderately across most sectors, but especially in the 
hospitality, retail, and non-profit sectors. Standards 
tightened some. Consumer loan demand decreased 
moderately due to a large pullback in requests for auto 
and home-purchase loans. Contacts noted that 
consumers were carrying higher credit card balances 
even though new spending was lower. Mort-gage 
refinancing volumes continued to increase. Reports on 
consumer loan quality were mixed: most contacts saw 
no change to date, but others experienced a deteri-
oration in line with rising unemployment. Consumer loan 
standards tightened modestly on balance. 
Agriculture 
Income prospects for the agricultural sector deteriorated 
substantially as the spread of the coronavirus led to a 
dramatic fall in many commodity prices. A large drop in 
ethanol prices led ethanol plants to cut production and 
corn consumption, which pushed corn prices lower. The 
drop in ethanol production also reduced the availability 
of corn byproducts needed for nutritional balance in 
corn-based animal food rations. This led livestock 
operations to switch to soy-meal and helped support 
soybean prices. In spite of shortages of some meat 
products in stores, most livestock prices fell as demand 
from restaurants and other food service providers 
weakened. Milk sales declined substantially as schools 
closed, but egg prices spiked. Contacts expressed 
concern about the health and availability of agriculture 
workers, particularly for specialty crop production. 
Access to credit for farm operators was little changed, 
though loan requests increased.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity has declined sharply since February. Essentially all contacts reported some degree of slowdown in 
activity due to COVID-19. In the worst cases, firms are expecting zero revenue in April and possibly May. Many firms 
reported moderate to severe temporary layoffs, furloughs, or paid time off. A considerable share of contacts reported 
reducing employee pay, particularly the pay of salaried employees with higher-than-average wages at their firms. 
Planned capital spending has been cut back at most firms to preserve cash, as even those firms in high-demand sectors 
are expecting delayed payments on goods during the coming quarter. At this point, there were no reports of abrupt 
cancellations of ongoing construction projects. Residential real estate conditions have held steady through March, and 
District agriculture conditions improved modestly from the previous reporting period. 
 Employment and Wages 
District firms reported moderate to severe temporary 
layoffs, furloughs, or paid time off. Hotels and hospitality 
contacts reported workforce reductions of around 90% of 
staff. Reported reductions at specialty retailers, auto 
dealers, and restaurants have ranged from 50% to 70%. 
Staffing contacts reported reductions in new job open-
ings of between 20% and 80%. Firms with a high de-
mand for their products or services have not reported 
layoffs but have experienced challenges maintaining 
current employment levels. A grocer mentioned signifi-
cant absenteeism; a manufacturing contact noted about 
10% of its workforce required changed or reduced hours 
due to school closures or other challenges. Firms also 
reported difficulties and/or delays in onboarding new 
employees, often relaxing or temporarily removing back-
ground checks and drug tests. 
A considerable share of contacts reported reducing 
employee salaries, particularly for salaried employees 
with higher-than-average wages at their firms. One 
payroll firm reported that its most-affected clients have 
cut salaries on non-furloughed staff between 5% and 
25%. However, broad-based pay cuts have been 
relatively rare, with firms prioritizing layoffs over broader 
wage reductions.  
Prices 
Significant changes in the demand for some products 
and services and the proliferation of new product 
offerings have complicated the measurement of 
consumer price inflation. Restaurants have moved from 
dine-in to take-out options with increasingly unique 
promotions. Contacts reported increasing the prices of 
necessity items, such as the price of eggs doubling. 
Prices for premium food products, by contrast, seem to 
be falling due to decreased demand. One grocer noted 
turning unsold premium steaks into ground beef (which 
was out of stock), but charging a higher price than is 
typical ground sirloin. Auto dealers report significantly 
lower used car prices and a greater tendency to sell new 
cars for less than their sticker price.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity in early March was generally 
robust, followed by steep declines starting in the second 
half of the month after stay-at-home regulations were 
enacted. Areas in the District without these orders as 
well as rural areas reported a slower rate of decline. 
Restaurants and specialty retailers have generally lost at 
least half of their revenue. Reports from auto dealers 
were very weak; dealers generally expect March sales to 
be lower than one year ago, with sales close to zero in 
April.   
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

H-2
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis  
Hospitality contacts reported cancellations of nearly all 
major events and conferences though June 1. Events 
scheduled for later in the year are currently still in place. 
Tourism venues reported strong business during the first 
weeks of March, but closures brought down overall 
business activity for March.  
Manufacturing 
Reports from manufacturing contacts indicate declines in 
overall production, but the rates of decline vary consider-
ably by firm. A notable number of contacts (particularly 
those related to autos and other durable goods) have 
temporarily shut down, but manufacturers of food 
products, chemicals, and medical devices continue to 
operate with extremely high demand. However, these 
firms are generally reporting 5% to 10% reductions in 
produc-tion due to supply chain disruptions and 
adjustments to workers’ arrangements. For example, 
contacts report multi-day temporary shut downs for deep 
cleaning, increased time between shifts for additional 
cleaning, and staggering break times to reduce cafeteria 
occupancy. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has worsened 
since the previous report. Major hospitals in the District 
report significant declines in revenue as elective 
procedures are postponed due to the COVID-19 
outbreak. The transportation industry has remained 
relatively stable since the previous report—the exception 
being passen-ger traffic, as airports report steep drops in 
enplaning. Courier services report increased demand, 
causing backlogs at fulfillment centers of up to one week. 
Contacts in this industry report difficulty keeping facilities 
adequately staffed. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate conditions have held steady 
through March. Contacts report very strong sales during 
the first half of the month. A contact in the St. Louis area 
reported that their March sales were up 24% from one 
year ago. Due to delays, many March sales are 
expected to close in April. A drop in sales is expected to 
occur around late April or May. Various contacts expect 
this drop in sales to be somewhere between 8% and 
25% relative to one year ago. One contact reported 
about 5% of their existing listings were pulled off the 
market during mid-March. Contacts reported decreases 
in property showings of around 75% of their normal 
average weekly showings from early March to the end of 
March. 
Reports of residential construction activity showed little 
change, as projects were generally allowed to continue. 
There were reports of some, but not many, households 
backing out of pending construction contracts due to 
current uncertainty. Many contracts at this point, for both 
home sales and new construction, are including lang-
uage related to COVID-19. 
Banking and Finance 
Reports from District banks indicate substantial and 
widespread increases in demand for banking services 
since February. Demand for cash and for other forms of 
liquid assets has increased. In early March, banks 
reported that some of their larger clients were 
responding to future uncertainty by drawing down on 
lines of credit and depositing the funds in their checking 
accounts. Demand for residential mortgages remained 
elevated during the early part of March, and banks 
reported strong refinancing activity. While the pipeline for 
these loans remains strong, new activity has slowed and 
many rates have not yet been locked.  
During the first week of April, the attention of banks 
abruptly turned to the SBA/PPP loan program, with 
bankers feeling overwhelmed by the program and un-
clear on how to approve firm applications and administer 
the loans. Banks report operational difficulties as many 
staff are working remotely or in decentralized branches 
to protect worker health.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions improved modestly from 
the previous reporting period. The number of acres 
planted in the District for corn, cotton, rice, and soybeans 
increased 8% compared with last year. All states in the 
District increased their number of acres planted as 
planting season in 2019 was severely affected by poor 
weather. Corn, rice, and soybeans were planted in 
greater quantities compared with last year. Southern 
parts of the District have planted fewer acres of cotton 
and more of rice.  
District contacts stated that the COVID-19 pandemic has 
had a relatively muted effect on the agricultural sector to 
date. Several contacts reported that farmers and 
agricultural suppliers do not have current plans to reduce 
output or employment at this time. Contacts cited 
continued trade disputes with China, weather, commodity 
prices, and deteriorating credit conditions as sources of 
uncertainty for the industry.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Ninth District fell substantially since the last report due to the COVID-19 outbreak and pandemic 
response. Employment fell significantly, and wage pressures fell overall due to layoffs, while price pressures remained 
modest on balance. The District economy saw declines in consumer spending, tourism, services, construction and real 
estate, manufacturing, and energy. Agricultural conditions were steady at low levels.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment fell significantly since the last report. 
Conditions in February were quite positive, with 
continued strong hiring demand across much of the 
District. However, conditions changed dramatically over 
the course of March with the spread of the coronavirus 
and related government actions for sheltering in place 
and the forced closure of many nonessential businesses. 
Applications for unemployment benefits in March easily 
hit record levels among all District states. Over the last 
two full weeks in March, more than 225,000 workers in 
Minnesota filed for unemployment, roughly 30 times the 
level seen over the same period in 2019. Numerous 
surveys by the Minneapolis Fed and other external 
organizations found that a wide swath of firms were 
laying off workers. Two District-wide surveys of firms by 
the Minneapolis Fed (one in mid-March, one in early 
April) found that layoffs were occurring across all 
sectors, though with some variation. Cutbacks were 
highest among firms in food, accommodation, entertain-
ment, health care, and retail sectors, and lowest in 
banking and finance, followed by manufacturing and 
professional and technical fields. Reported workforce 
cutbacks were seen among firms of all sizes, with 
slightly higher percentages among small firms. Mass 
layoff events tracked by District states rose, though 
some states track only those related to permanent 
closure, of which there were still comparatively few. 
Information from Minnesota, Montana, and Wisconsin, 
which track a broader set of layoffs, suggested 
more widespread layoffs, with the large majority 
considered temporary by employers.  
Wage pressure fell overall due to the unprecedented 
increase in worker layoffs. Among firms cutting workers, 
there were also some reports of wage freezes and cuts 
for remaining workers. For certain industries seeing 
strong demand—grocery chains, manufacturers of 
critical equipment—there were isolated reports of wage 
increases to meet customer demand and to compensate 
workers for greater health risks.    
Prices  
Price pressures were modest on balance since the 
previous report, with the notable exception of surge 
pricing for some consumer goods in high demand due to 
the pandemic. A large majority of respondents to a late-
March survey of District firms reported unchanged or 
only slightly increased prices for inputs and in the prices 
charged for their products or services relative to a year 
earlier. Manufacturing contacts reported that prices for 
raw materials such as steel and plastic were stable. 
Retail fuel prices fell briskly in District states relative to 
the previous reporting period. Prices received by 
farmers in February increased from a year earlier for 
corn, soybeans, dry beans, lentils, milk, hogs, and 
turkeys, while prices for wheat, chickpeas, canola, hay, 
cattle, chickens, and eggs decreased.  
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

I-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending declined significantly since the last 
report, due to coronavirus concerns and related stay-in-
place guidelines from federal and state authorities that 
shut down many consumer-oriented businesses, either 
directly or indirectly. Surveys of tourism and hospitality 
firms in Minnesota and Montana showed notable virus-
related declines in sales already in early March, and 
worsening by month’s end. Expectations from Minnesota 
tourism-based businesses were for conditions to decline 
further in April, which is typically the start of the busy 
season for many firms. Hotel occupancy has seen a 
steep decline, plunging to 17 percent in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul at the end of March. Airline traffic in the District has 
seen a similarly large drop in passenger demand in 
March, with some airports reporting declines of 80 
percent or more.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services sector decreased, 
though the severity varied widely. A quarter of services 
firms responding to a survey reported no impact on 
March sales, though nearly all of the remainder saw 
modest to severe decreases. The transportation sector 
saw a similarly mixed impact, with a majority of trucking 
firms surveyed reporting a decline in activity due to 
closures of clients, while others saw demand surge from 
the grocery and other sectors.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction fell since the last report, though 
some underlying optimism remained. A survey of 
Minnesota construction firms by the Minneapolis Fed 
found that a significant number of firms had seen some 
delays in existing or expected projects. The majority of 
delays stemmed from concern by owners about project 
viability given the virus outbreak. But delays also 
stemmed from supply-chain disruptions, labor shortages, 
and the lack of availability of some government 
workers—due to shelter-in-place orders—for permits, 
inspections, and other approvals necessary to keep 
projects moving. The overall outlook of the industry has 
shifted negatively, the result of both known delays and a 
large amount of uncertainty about future work. However, 
the designation of the industry as essential in most 
District states was perceived as a boost, as was the 
coming of warmer weather so more work could take 
place outside of confined spaces. Residential 
construction was modestly lower. In Minneapolis-St. 
Paul, March single-family permits were higher compared 
with a year earlier. However, the aforementioned 
construction survey found that a high share of home 
builders were experiencing project delays.  
Commercial real estate was lower since the last report. 
Significant layoffs and slower overall activity in March 
was expected to continue into the coming months, 
creating upward pressure on vacancy rates and 
downward pressure on leasing costs across all real 
estate categories, but particularly for retail and office 
space. However, the swiftness of changing market 
conditions made it hard to discern the full effects across 
different property categories and geographic regions. 
Residential real estate was modestly lower, but varied 
geographically. Home sales in rural parts of Minnesota 
are reportedly “very busy—as if there was no pandemic 
in place,” said an industry contact. At the same time, 
Minneapolis-St. Paul and other metro centers in the state 
were seeing “significantly reduced activity.”  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity in the District contracted sharply 
relative to the last report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions indicated substantially decreased activity in 
March compared with a month earlier in Minnesota and 
the Dakotas; production and employment in particular fell 
sharply. A majority of manufacturers responding to a 
large survey of District firms conducted in early April 
reported decreased sales in March compared with the 
previous months, with more than a third reporting 
declines of 25 percent or greater. Impacts of the 
pandemic and response on manufacturers varied by 
market segment. Producers of construction materials 
reported disruptions in demand as construction activity 
was curtailed in some regions. However, processed food 
manufacturers reported brisk increases in demand for 
many products, as did suppliers of inputs to that industry.   
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were steady at low levels. 
Some contacts described the COVID-19 pandemic as a 
potential “perfect storm” for an already struggling rural 
economy. Early reports suggested that District farmers 
intended to plant less wheat and more corn and 
substantially more soybean acres this year. District oil 
and gas exploration activity fell moderately from the 
previous report. The number of active drilling rigs as of 
late March was down slightly from the last report, but 
contacts in the oil-producing region of the District 
reported layoffs in oil fields and substantial reductions in 
capital spending. Contacts in nonferrous mining reported 
that a slowdown in international demand due to the 
COVID-19 outbreak in China may have abated 
somewhat in recent weeks.  ■ 

J-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
After holding fairly steady in the first half of March, Tenth District economic activity deteriorated sharply later in the month 
as the spread of COVID-19 negatively impacted consumer spending and business activity. Most contacts expected addi-
tional declines in the months ahead. Consumer spending slowed significantly since the previous survey, with markedly 
lower sales in the auto, restaurant and tourism sectors. After some stabilization earlier this year, manufacturing activity 
contracted sharply in March and expectations fell to levels last seen in early 2009. Transportation and wholesale trade 
contacts reported an increase in sales, but anticipated sharply lower sales in the next few months. Professional and high-
tech sales declined slightly and were anticipated to fall further. Residential real estate conditions continued to hold fairly 
steady, but commercial real estate conditions worsened moderately. The decline in energy activity accelerated in the 
District as oil prices fell further below profitable levels. The agriculture sector weakened as cattle and corn prices fell 
sharply and credit conditions worsened. District employment fell slightly in March, but layoffs and furloughs increased 
significantly over the past two weeks suggesting worsening employment levels in the months ahead. Selling prices de-
clined slightly in both the services and manufacturing sectors and additional declines were anticipated.     
Employment and Wages 
District employment was down slightly in March, while 
employee hours declined modestly. However, employ-
ment conditions deteriorated significantly throughout the 
month, including a dramatic rise in unemployment insur-
ance claims in the final week of the month, and contacts 
expected additional declines in employment and 
employee hours in the months ahead. Respondents in all 
sec-tors reported lower employment levels except for 
retail trade and real estate which noted modest job 
gains. Similarly, retail trade and real estate, along with 
health services were the only sectors with employment 
above year-ago levels. 
For the first time in several years, a majority of contacts 
did not report labor shortages. Many respondents noted 
uncertainty surrounding the spread of COVID-19, leading 
them to layoff or furlough workers and to implement 
hiring freezes. A majority of respondents reported that 
they did not have to raise wages more than normal to 
attract or keep any types of workers. Overall wages rose 
slightly, but declines were expected in the months 
ahead.   
Prices 
Input prices rose modestly and selling prices declined 
slightly in the services sector, while both input and sell-
ing prices fell slightly in the manufacturing sector. Con-
tacts in both the manufacturing and services sectors 
expected prices to decline in the months ahead. 
Respondents in the retail trade sector noted strong 
growth in both input and selling prices since the previous 
survey period. Contacts in the restaurant sector noted a 
slight increase in input prices, while selling prices edged 
down. In the transportation industry, input prices fell 
moderately and selling prices declined slightly. Selling 
prices held steady for construction supplies after rising in 
the previous survey period. Manufacturers reported 
slightly lower prices for both finished products and raw 
materials prices, and anticipated modest declines in the 
next few months.   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending decreased significantly since the 
previous survey as regional businesses were negatively 
affected by COVID-19. While some retailers, like grocers 
and pharmacies reported increased sales, sales were 
markedly lower for the auto, restaurant and tourism 
sectors. Although some health services experienced 
higher levels of activity, most healthcare services firms 
reported slower sales and a decline in employment 
levels due to the decrease in elective procedures. Auto 
sales were down substantially compared with a year 
ago, and inventories were expected to rise. Restaurant 
sales were significantly lower compared with the 
previous survey period. Tourism sales fell sharply in 
March 
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

J-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City  
and were well below year-ago levels. Over half of con-
tacts expected lower levels of employment in 2020 due 
to COVID-19 and recent market volatility, and an even 
greater share of firms were concerned about cash avail-
ability.     
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity 
Manufacturing activity contracted sharply in March, with 
declines in both durable and nondurable goods plants. 
Production, new orders, employment, and raw materials 
inventories all decreased compared to the previous 
survey period and fell below year-ago levels. Around 60 
percent of manufacturers faced delayed payments from 
customers, and 54 percent had concerns about cash 
availability. Expectations for future activity fell to levels 
last seen in early 2009, and contacts reported putting 
capital investments on hold.  
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the transportation 
sector experienced slightly higher sales, though sales 
were still below year-ago levels. Sales increased moder-
ately for wholesale trade and remained above year-ago 
levels. However, sales declined slightly for professional 
and high-tech services sectors compared to the previous 
survey period and were down from a year-ago. Contacts 
in the transportation and wholesale trade sectors antici-
pated significantly lower sales in the coming months, and 
expectations for the professional and high-tech services 
sector were also negative.      
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity generally held steady in 
March, while commercial real estate conditions deterio-
rated moderately. Residential sales and inventories were 
flat compared to the previous survey despite a typical 
seasonal pickup, and were below year-ago levels. Home 
prices edged up. However, sales, starts, traffic of 
potential buyers, and prices were expected to decline in 
the coming months. Commercial real estate activity 
decreased moderately in March. Vacancy rates 
increased, while absorption, completions, construction 
underway and sales declined. Several contacts also 
reported that access to credit had become more difficult. 
Over the next few months, commercial real estate 
activity was expected to deteriorate further.    
Banking 
District loan demand declined modestly in recent weeks, 
with decreases in commercial real estate loans, commer-
cial and industrial loans, and consumer installment 
loans. Loan demand rose modestly for residential real 
estate, while agriculture loan demand remained steady. 
Many bankers reported tightening of credit standards, 
primarily confined to commercial real estate and
commercial and industrial loans. Loan quality was 
modestly below a year ago, but was expected to 
deteriorate sharply in the next six months. Cash 
withdrawals increased, and bankers have been able to 
meet that demand. Overall, bankers had a guarded 
outlook as they kept a close watch on virus developments 
and moved toward a more risk-averse position. Many 
banks have moved to remote work arrangements, and 
were limiting most customer interactions to drive-through 
service.     
Energy 
District energy activity decreased at a faster pace 
compared with the previous survey period. Expectations 
for future drilling and business activity worsened, with 
many firms not expecting rig counts or employment levels 
to pick up in the near term. Revenues and profit levels 
declined significantly, and most firms decreased their 
plans for capital expenditures or put them on hold. The 
number of active oil and gas rigs in the District fell further. 
The sharp drop in commodity prices from the Saudi -
Russia supply shock increase coupled with the decrease 
in demand due to the global COVID-19 pandemic has 
weakened the outlook for energy activity. March 2020 
price levels were not profitable for District contacts and if 
oil prices remained below $40, respondents expected 
only 60-65 percent of firms to remain solvent in the next 
year.
Agriculture 
Agricultural economic conditions weakened in March. 
Macroeconomic developments related to COVID-19 were 
expected to put downward pressure on prices for many 
agricultural commodities, despite sharp increases in 
short-term demand for retail food products. Cattle prices 
declined rapidly in mid-March which reduced profit 
opportunities for producers. Corn prices also decreased 
sharply as demand declined alongside a substantial drop 
in ethanol production. Credit conditions weakened 
modestly from the prior survey period, and while many 
farm lenders cited uncertainty about the extent of the 
impact, most expected conditions to deteriorate further in 
coming months. Contacts connected to food processing 
and retailing reported supply chains have been well 
maintained despite rapid increases in demand.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
There was sudden and broad-based weakening of the Eleventh District economy during the reporting period. Many 
firms reported a sharp reduction in activity, resulting from business disruptions and closures due to the COVID-19 
pandemic. Activity in the energy, retail, and service sectors was the hardest hit. Overall factory output and new orders 
plunged, though production in food and printing-related manufacturing increased. Loan demand contracted broadly and 
credit quality eroded slightly, except in residential real estate lending. Housing demand held up through mid-March but 
has declined notably since then. Employment and hours worked plummeted, resulting in downward wage pressures. 
Input costs were flat to down, and selling prices dipped amid declining demand for many products and services. 
Outlooks worsened markedly and uncertainty surged, as the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related 
containment measures intensified. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment declines were steep, particularly in retail, 
transportation, administrative and waste management, 
and accommodation and food services, as stay-at-home 
orders led to widespread business disruptions and 
closures. A March Dallas Fed survey of 400 Texas 
businesses in the services and manufacturing sectors 
showed that one-third of respondents had either tempo-
rarily or permanently laid off workers, and 56 percent 
noted that additional layoffs were likely if the situation did 
not improve. Some firms noted needing financial 
assistance to maintain their payrolls, while others were 
adjusting hours and/or salaries. Airlines were also 
offering a voluntary leave option. Energy contacts said 
they expect industry employment to fall sharply in 
tandem with oilfield activity. By contrast, a few firms said 
they were taking this opportunity to hire due to increased 
demand or a desire to bring on more qualified 
employees. 
There were generally downward pressure on wages 
outside of manufacturing and construction. 
Prices 
Plunging demand for products and services led to wide-
spread declines in selling prices, including for used cars 
and energy. Airlines reported increasing the quota of 
lower-priced tickets. Rates on rail shipments of some 
commodities rose, but pricing for most others dipped. 
Input costs were flat in services and down in energy, 
manufacturing, and retail.  
Manufacturing  
Factory activity deteriorated sharply in March, following a 
broad-based acceleration during the previous reporting 
period. Many firms noted a significant reduction in 
demand and/or a rise in order cancellations, resulting 
from business disruptions caused by shelter-in-place 
man-dates. Some contacts also cited weak oil prices as 
a headwind for growth. In contrast, pandemic-related 
increased demand for food and protective equipment 
boosted output in food and printing-related 
manufacturing.  
Refiners and chemical producers indicated softening 
global demand and downward pressure on margins due 
to the coronavirus pandemic. Firms noted delaying large 
construction projects and lowering utilization rates as 
demand for fuels dropped and inventories rose. 
Overall outlooks turned negative, with many manufactur-
ers expecting business activity to be adversely impacted 
because of COVID-19 for at least three to six months.  
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

K-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Retail sales plummeted over the reporting period as a 
drop-off in consumer discretionary spending and wide-
spread business closures—many mandated by local 
governments—precipitated steep declines in revenues. 
Auto sales plunged, while a few healthcare and general 
merchandise stores noted higher demand. Outlooks 
deteriorated notably as businesses re-evaluated plans in 
the face of rising uncertainties. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector was negatively affected by 
the coronavirus outbreak, with firms overwhelmingly 
seeing or expecting to see lower demand as customers 
reduced spending and were forced to cut back or cancel 
previously planned purchases or events. The few who 
saw stronger demand were tied to the grocery or profes-
sional services industries which are largely able to con-
tinue operating. Accommodation and food services and 
arts and recreation industries were among the hardest 
hit. Airlines saw a dramatic decline in demand. Trip 
cancellations were outpacing new passenger bookings, 
and demand is expected to deteriorate further. Rail and 
air cargo volumes decreased. Most staffing firms saw a 
significant drop in orders, though there were reports of 
increased demand for workers in healthcare, nursing, 
and pharmaceuticals. Service sector outlooks were 
largely pessimistic due to uncertainty surrounding when 
things would return to normal. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Housing demand held up through mid-March, but sales 
and traffic have dropped off markedly since then, particu-
larly in Houston. Builders reported a higher-than-normal 
cancellation rate, though some said they had managed 
to meet their March sales goal due to strong demand in 
the earlier half of the month. Showings dipped as many 
sellers took their homes off the market. Several new land 
and lot deals were on pause, and builders were renegoti-
ating existing lot contracts. Outlooks weakened consider-
ably, with sales and starts expected to slow because of 
the coronavirus outbreak.  
Multifamily contacts said impacts from the spread of 
COVID-19 will become evident in the months ahead as 
interruptions in household incomes compel many tenants 
to seek relief on rent payments. Expectations are for the 
low and high end of the market to be the most impacted. 
Commercial leasing activity was beginning to be affect-
ed, with conditions in the retail sector deteriorating 
rapidly. The investment climate is uncertain, making it 
difficult to price deals. A number of land and commercial 
real estate transactions have been delayed or cancelled 
as investors take a wait-and-see approach. 
Financial Services 
Loan volumes contracted broadly, led by declines in 
commercial and industrial lending. The only exception 
was residential real estate loan demand, which inc-
reased during the reporting period. Loan pricing 
continued its marked decline, and credit standards 
tightened. Credit quality eroded across most loan types 
and most bankers expect further deterioration. About 25 
percent of bankers reported increased use of existing 
lines of credit and 26 percent noted higher demand for 
new ones, and most said they have plans in place to 
meet the higher demand. Business activity tumbled, and 
expectations for activity in the next six months worsened 
notably. 
Energy 
Eleventh District drilling and completion activity fell 
sharply toward the end of the reporting period in res-
ponse to a collapse in West Texas Intermediate crude 
oil prices. Many producers are evaluating which wells 
need to be shut-in, particularly as physical storage 
capacity for oil depletes rapidly. Firms said they are 
unable to access capital through credit markets, promp-
ting concerns about a sharp increase in bank-ruptcies. 
U.S. crude production is projected to decline by year 
end, but there is wide disagreement on how far it will fall.  
Agriculture 
Recent rainfall remedied drought conditions across most 
of the district. Wheat demand and prices rose due to 
increased purchases of breads and pastas during the 
coronavirus pandemic. Contacts expect some farmers 
will switch away from cotton to wheat or other grains this 
year, as cotton prices have plummeted and could slip 
further as people pare back discretionary spending on 
clothing. On the livestock side, pasture conditions were 
favorable and prices for cattle ready for feedlots rose 
because of pandemic-related increased demand for 
beef. Meat-packers have seen higher revenues in 
recent weeks as grocery stores increased orders and 
beef and chicken prices have risen. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District contracted notably during the reporting period of mid-February through March. 
Many businesses reported employment or wage declines due to disruptions related to the outbreak of coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19). The rate of price inflation decreased modestly. Sales of retail goods and vehicles declined 
precipitously, and activity for providers of consumer and business services slowed sharply toward the end of the 
reporting period. Manufacturing contracted moderately, and activity in the agriculture sector slowed somewhat. 
Conditions in residential and commercial real estate were mixed, though the residential market saw slight growth on 
balance. Lending declined moderately.  
Employment and Wages 
Due to disruptions stemming from the outbreak of 
COVID-19, many businesses reduced employment 
levels, and others scrapped plans to expand employ-
ment. Developments such as these were reported 
across various skill levels and industries, though most 
occurred for lower hourly wage jobs in the retail, food 
services, and tourism industries. A freeze on television 
and film production in the District resulted in widespread 
layoffs in the entertainment sector. A major hotel chain in 
Southern California put 80 percent of employees on 
furlough and reduced hours for remaining employees. A 
restaurant-chain owner in Seattle laid off several hun-
dred employees. Some businesses reported no change 
in employment levels but expected to have to cut jobs in 
coming weeks if mandated business closures continue. 
One metal manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest antici-
pated reducing payrolls as new orders have declined 
significantly. A financial technology company in Northern 
California put on hold a plan to hire 1,500 additional staff 
members. 
Wages declined at some employers. The Southern 
California hotel company also cut managers’ pay 10 to 
15 percent in response to a severe decline in occupancy 
rates. A building supplies manufacturer in Northern 
California cut wages somewhat to contain costs. One 
restaurant chain in Washington reported salary cuts of 
up to 20 percent for office and administrative staff.  
Prices 
The rate of price inflation decreased a bit. Prices for 
building materials declined moderately on balance as 
new construction projects were put on hold. Some con-
tacts reported lower fuel and energy costs along with 
lower airfares. Changes in prices of agricultural products 
were mixed. For some growers, prices were stable with 
solid demand from domestic grocery stores. Selling 
prices for other growers, especially those dependent on 
exporting, fell as demand from abroad remained sub-
dued. Many businesses expected heightened slack in 
the labor market going forward, eliminating any prior 
upward pressure on wage and price growth. Steel manu-
facturers in the Pacific Northwest reported no changes in 
input or selling prices. There were a few reports of price 
gouging on essential household goods in short supply.    
Retail Trade and Services 
With few exceptions, contacts reported that sales of 
retail goods and vehicles declined precipitously on net 
over the reporting period; this decrease was due to 
mandated closures of nonessential businesses in all 
District states in mid- to late-March in response to the 
spread of COVID-19. Activity came to a standstill for 
most retailers in California, Hawaii, Idaho and Washing-
ton, with exceptions reported for grocery stores and 
some building product retailers. In Idaho, vehicle sales 
along with sales of parts and accessories fell from a solid 
level in late-February and early-March to near zero in 
mid-March. Some business owners anticipated that retail 
sales will decline further as job losses decrease in-
comes. Additionally, lasting impacts of the COVID-19 
outbreak could accelerate the trend towards online 
sales, hurting small retailers with brick-and-mortar stores. 
Many respondents deemed concessionary government
The Beige Book ■ April 2020

L-2
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
loans essential to prevent widespread small business 
closures. 
Activity for providers of consumer and business services 
also declined sharply toward the end of the reporting 
period. Restaurant sales fell sharply. Pivots to take-out 
operations did not compensate for lost dine-in revenue. 
A hotelier in Southern California reported that occupancy 
rates entered free fall in mid-March, and many hotels 
decided to close temporarily. This contact had previously 
expected stable growth in the first quarter of the year. 
The tourism industry in Hawaii essentially shut down in 
March, a blow to the state’s economy. A major shipping 
and logistics company reported that small business 
shipments slowed markedly, and international volumes 
fell by almost half. Home deliveries from big box stores 
held solid though. Television and film production in 
Southern California halted. A contact in the health-care 
industry in Nevada reported that providers were facing 
limited supplies of essential items like masks, gowns, 
and ventilators and have been forced to begin rationing 
care for COVID-19 patients.  
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector contracted moder-
ately. Most manufacturers, while still operating, noted 
that the supply chains that deliver raw material inputs 
have been negatively affected by the outbreak of COVID 
-19. A contact in Southern California reported that manu-
facturers of components for renewable energy production 
have seen decreases in the supply of raw materials. A 
metal fabricator in Oregon had a healthy backlog of orders 
but noted emerging difficulties in obtaining inputs and a 
decline in new orders. A building products manu-facturer 
in the Mountain West saw a severe drop in demand from 
retailers, who instead bought in smaller quantities from 
intermediary wholesalers.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries 
Activity in the agriculture sector slowed somewhat as 
growers grappled with disruptions due to the COVID-19 
outbreak. Several contacts noted that most agriculture 
businesses in states with shelter-in-place orders, like 
California and Washington, were designated as 
“essential” and allowed to continue operations. Therefore, 
some farming contacts in Central California and Eastern 
Washington reported that activity was broadly stable, 
sales to grocery stores were solid, and production inputs 
and labor supply were generally available. However, a 
bulk food producer and distributor noted that starting in 
mid-March sales to restaurants across the District were 
virtually nonexistent. Washington fruit growers and Idaho 
corn growers saw a noticeable decline in domestic 
demand, which has severely jeopardized profitability for 
some businesses. A contact in Eastern Washington 
noted that production could be disrupted if the flow of 
migrant workers from Mexico is impacted by restrictions 
on Mexico-U.S. border crossings. On the export side, 
fruit and nut growers in California have seen continued 
weak demand from China, though wheat growers in 
Idaho saw an increase in new orders from China in the 
past few weeks. In general, contacts noted that the 
strong dollar also hampered export sales.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity was mixed but grew 
slightly on balance. Contacts reported that most in-
progress home building continued throughout March, 
while the future status of residential construction vis-à-
vis nonessential business closures was unclear. In most 
states, construction is expected to continue, though the 
demand outlook for new residential projects is highly 
uncertain. Reports also painted a mixed picture of sales 
activity in the District. Buyer response to the COVID-19 
outbreak varied by local market as did local government 
restrictions on selling. Some reports for Idaho, Oregon, 
California, and Washington indicated that sales activity 
and prices were stable around recent levels. Other 
reports for Idaho and California indicated that sales fell 
severely in the second half of March.  
Conditions in commercial real estate markets were 
mixed. In Southern California, major infrastructure 
projects proceeded amidst the statewide shelter-in-place 
order though some reports emphasized that continuation 
depends on maintaining a healthy workforce. In the 
Mountain West, commercial projects generally 
proceeded though new project proposals declined
noticeably. Some reports highlighted the potential for 
building owners to face strain if commercial tenants are 
unable to make rental payments.     
Financial Institutions 
Lending activity declined moderately amidst ample 
liquidity. Reports noted that new loan origination fell 
sharply, and many banks received payment deferral 
requests from small business borrowers. Several banks 
readied emergency credit lines and expected credit 
quality to deteriorate as broad economic conditions turn 
for the worse. A few lenders expressed concern that new 
government lending programs would not allow speedy 
distribution of funds to small businesses. Venture capital 
investing slowed severely and investors are expected to 
become highly selective regarding new funding 
opportunities. Home mortgage refinancing activity was 
robust following decreases in the federal funds rate in 
early March. ■ 


