The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
May 27, 2020 
May 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
based on information collected on or before May 18, 2020. This docu‐
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity declined in all Districts – falling sharply in most – reflecting disruptions associated with the COVID-19 
pandemic. Consumer spending fell further as mandated closures of retail establishments remained largely in place 
during most of the survey period. Declines were especially severe in the leisure and hospitality sector, with very little 
activity at travel and tourism businesses. Auto sales were substantially lower than a year ago, although several Districts 
noted recent improvement. A majority of Districts reported sharp drops in manufacturing activity, and production was 
notably weak in auto, aerospace, and energy-related plants. Residential home sales plunged due in part to fewer new 
listings and to restrictions on home showings in many areas. Construction activity also fell as new projects failed to 
materialize in many Districts. Commercial real estate contacts mentioned that a large number of retail tenants had 
deferred or missed rent payments. Bankers reported strong demand for PPP loans. Agricultural conditions worsened, 
with several Districts reporting reduced production capacity at meat-processing plants due to closures and social dis-
tancing measures. Energy activity plummeted as firms announced oil well closures, which led to historically low levels 
of active drilling rigs. Although many contacts expressed hope that overall activity would pick-up as businesses reo-
pened, the outlook remained highly uncertain and most contacts were pessimistic about the potential pace of recovery.   
Employment and Wages 
Employment continued to decrease in all Districts, including steep losses in most Districts, as social distancing and 
business closures affected employment at many firms. Securing PPP loans helped many businesses to limit or avoid 
layoffs, although employment continued to fall sharply in retail and in leisure and hospitality sectors. Contacts cited 
challenges in bringing employees back to work, including workers’ health concerns, limited access to childcare, and 
generous unemployment insurance benefits. Overall wage pressures were mixed as some firms cut wages while others 
implemented temporary wage increases for essential staff or to compete with unemployment insurance. Most Districts 
noted wage increases in high-demand and essential sectors, while wages were flat or declining in other sectors. 
Prices 
Pricing pressures varied but were steady to down modestly on balance. Weak demand weighed on selling prices, with 
some contacts noting discounting for apparel, hotel rooms, and airfare. Several Districts also reported low commodity 
prices, including oil, steel, and several agricultural commodities. Supply chain disruptions and strong demand led to 
higher prices for some grocery items including meat and fresh fruit. One District reported that firms faced additional 
costs related to safety protocols and social distancing compliance, while another District noted that the costs of person-
al protective equipment had risen due to strong demand. 
Boston 
Activity continued declining as a result of pandemic-
related economic shutdowns and social distancing 
guidelines. Retail and tourism firms cut employment, 
staffing firms saw reduced demand, and most manufac-
turing contacts froze hiring. Respondents said the out-
look was very uncertain.  
 
New York 
The regional economy continued to contract since the 
last report, though there were scattered signs of a pickup 
in early May. Businesses reported widespread layoffs 
and flat to declining wages, but the vast majority of sepa-
rations were deemed temporary. Prices paid rose slight-
ly, while selling prices edged down. Leisure & hospitality 
and retail trade have remained the most severely affect-
ed.  Financial firms reported weaker activity.   
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Business activity continued to fall sharply during the 
current Beige Book period, as the COVID-19 pandemic 
persisted. Nearly all sectors are operating at lower levels 
of activity. Government assistance eased liquidity con-
cerns and addressed rapidly rising joblessness. General 
prices have begun to fall, but the wage path remains 
mixed. Firms also remain uncertain of the future.  
Cleveland 
Customer demand declined in a broad range of indus-
tries. The few areas of strength were limited to grocery 
sales and business lending. Firms responded with wide-
spread layoffs, deep cuts to capital spending, and wage 
reductions for a growing minority of firms. Inflation pres-
sures eased because of weak demand and lower com-
modity prices. Though many firms believe the worst 
declines have passed, few are expecting a strong recov-
ery. 
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy contracted further in recent 
weeks as the shutdown measures to slow the spread of 
the COVID-19 outbreak continued to have severe conse-
quences. Retail, travel, and hospitality remained some of 
the hardest hit industries, but negative impacts were 
reported in every sector. Employment declined sharply 
and price growth slowed slightly, remaining modest. 
Atlanta 
Economic conditions remained weak. Labor markets 
were soft and nonlabor costs decreased. Retail sales of 
essential products and services rose and ecommerce 
activity grew. Hospitality activity continued to weaken. 
Residential real estate slowed somewhat and commer-
cial real estate activity was mixed. Manufacturing activity 
decreased as new orders fell. Banking conditions were 
mixed.  
Chicago 
Economic activity declined sharply as the coronavirus 
caused major economic upheaval. Employment, con-
sumer spending, business spending, construction and 
real estate, manufacturing, and agriculture all decreased 
substantially. Wages edged up and prices were little 
changed. Financial conditions improved modestly. 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions have weakened moderately since 
the previous report. Around half of firms are closed 
temporarily. Among the firms that are closed, about one-
third expect to reopen in the next 3 weeks. Banks indi-
cated a sharp increase in delinquencies, primarily in 
mortgages, credit cards, and auto loans, but expect 
fewer delinquencies in the third quarter. 
Minneapolis 
The Ninth District economy contracted further. Employ-
ment fell significantly, and wage pressures fell due to the 
decline in activity along with wage and salary cuts by 
some firms. While most sectors declined, oil and gas 
exploration and supporting industries saw a particularly 
steep decline as oil prices fell dramatically. Restaurants, 
lodging, and tourism continued to suffer, and agriculture 
fell from an already low level. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity declined substantially since the previ-
ous survey, and contacts remained pessimistic about 
future levels of activity. Contacts reported broad-based 
declines in consumer spending. Real estate activity 
declined significantly, and sales fell at transportation, 
wholesale trade and professional and high-tech services 
firms. Manufacturing activity contracted sharply, and 
energy and agricultural sectors weakened further.    
Dallas 
Economic activity contracted further, though the pace of 
decline moderated from April to early May in manufactur-
ing and services. Oilfield activity fell to record lows. 
Home sales dropped sharply but were beginning to 
slowly improve. Employment plummeted, and selling 
prices fell. Outlooks were bleak and uncertain, largely 
centered on the speed and scope of the reopening. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District contracted mark-
edly. Employment declined dramatically due to virus 
related disruptions. Prices remained generally flat. Activi-
ty in retail trade, consumer and business services, and 
manufacturing all contracted noticeably. Activity in the 
agriculture sector slowed further. The residential real 
estate market was mixed, while the commercial side 
slumped. Lending activity increased due to PPP loans. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to decline into May according to First District business contacts. Many retailers and almost 
all hospitality businesses reported low to nil activity levels because of the pandemic. Responding manufacturers and 
staffing firms cited ongoing fall-offs in sales or revenue in recent weeks, but mostly still at sustainable levels. Commer-
cial and residential real estate markets continued to be on pause, with some retail tenants reportedly having difficulty 
paying rent. Many firms furloughed or laid off workers, but some, involved in “essential” or pandemic-fighting business-
es, retained staff and even continued hiring. Near-term outlooks were highly uncertain and generally downbeat. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment was generally down among business con-
tacts. At auto dealers, many sales workers were fur-
loughed as transactions moved online. Many employees 
at year-round tourist operations were laid off. Eight of 10 
manufacturers said they had frozen or largely frozen 
hiring; the two exceptions cited increased output. Some 
manufacturers laid off or furloughed workers and some 
implemented pay reductions but, for the most part, head-
count and pay remained at pre-pandemic levels. Many 
firms reported providing hourly supplements for produc-
tion workers because of work-related risks. While their 
overall bookings declined, staffing contacts reported that 
hiring employers were generally offering increased pay 
to candidates, as much as 25 percent to 30 percent 
higher than before the pandemic; they expect these 
higher pay rates to be temporary. 
Prices  
Few contacts mentioned pricing. Auto dealers reported 
financing incentives for cars. No manufacturing contacts 
cited any unusual pricing, except that milk prices col-
lapsed because of reduced sales to restaurants. 
Retail and Tourism 
Respondents continued to report major disruptions relat-
ed to COVID-19. Weekly automobile sales in Connecti-
cut dropped 60 percent from February to mid-April, 
though rebounds began in the final week of April; none-
theless, weekly sales remained down about 30 percent. 
All sales since the shutdown were online; once in-person 
sales resume, they are optimistic that transactions will 
recover further. One retailer continued to see year-over-
year increases in sales and profits from online sales, 
with a large increase in first-time online users.  
Restaurants across Massachusetts effectively halted 
service in mid-March. Upwards of 200,000 workers in 
Massachusetts restaurants were either furloughed or laid 
off since then. Fewer than half of full-service restaurants 
attempted takeout business and many found it not sus-
tainable or profitable. Social distancing rules mean that 
most restaurants will be able to operate at only 35 per-
cent to 40 percent of capacity, which may not be profita-
ble for many establishments. 
Travel industry contacts reported a 65 percent decline in 
hotel occupancy across New England, and a decline in 
excess of 80 percent in Greater Boston for April; those 
figures exclude hotels that were shuttered. Large con-
ventions have been canceled through early fall, and over 
200,000 hotel room nights will be lost as a result. In 
summer destinations, concerns heading into Memorial 
Day weekend remained high. A contact for one coastal 
area reported a stark increase in inquiries about bank-
ruptcy procedures from small retailers. Some optimism 
remains that visitors driving-distance away will satisfy 
their pent-up vacation demand locally. 
 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Experiences varied widely among 10 responding manu-
facturers. Four firms reported higher sales than a year 
earlier. For two semiconductor firms, demand for con-
sumer electronics remained strong. For a diagnostic 
equipment maker, the mix of demand changed, with less 
from universities and more from hospitals and other 
institutions on the front line of the fight against COVID-
19. A dairy firm saw “tremendous growth” in March as 
households stocked up. The explanations for firms with 
weaker sales ranged from demand reductions from the 
auto industry and commercial aviation to productivity 
declines related to COVID-19 prevention.   
Nine of the ten contacts said that all their facilities were 
open and only a few reported that any plants were shut 
at any point since the pandemic started. These firms’ 
processes were well-suited to social distancing, with well
-defined schedules and activities that required no contact 
between workers. Six contacts, including one with rising 
sales, reported negative revisions to capital spending.   
The outlook was pessimistic for almost all manufacturing 
contacts. A veterinary products maker said they ex-
pected demand to pick up this summer. By contrast, 
most respondents said they were very uncertain about 
when or even if demand would return to previous levels. 
Staffing Services 
Overall demand and placement activity at New England 
staffing firms slowed compared to pre-pandemic levels, 
but did not halt. Labor supply was mixed: one firm saw 
three or four times as many replies to a job posting as 
before COVID-19; others described supply as volatile. A 
majority of contacts noted that for some people, unem-
ployment benefits could outweigh a salary, providing less 
incentive to find a job. Some employers were interview-
ing and onboarding direct-hires virtually in the past six 
weeks—a sign that companies were looking beyond the 
current situation. 
Firms reported finding ways to cope with the challenges 
brought on by COVID-19, with new business strategies 
or new sales people in some cases. All contacts who 
were eligible for the Payroll Protection Program received 
funding, which they regarded as vital support; business-
es were also lining up other credit lines and resources in 
the face of uncertainty. The majority of contacts reported 
no major structural or compensation changes within their 
organizations due to COVID-19. Overall, contacts ex-
pressed optimism, “excited” (as one put it) to facilitate 
hiring during the upcoming recovery.  
 
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity in the First District came 
to a halt in March because of the COVID-19 shutdown. 
There were no leasing and investment sales activities 
except for a few time-sensitive transactions or lease 
renewals in Boston, Providence, and Hartford. Most 
office and industrial tenants were able to pay April rents, 
but retail tenants struggled. May rent collection was 
expected to be challenging, and lenders and landlords 
have been considering payment relief measures. Many 
tenants were also trying to renew their leases with short-
er terms. Business sentiment was cautious and ob-
servant.  
In the Boston market, renewing tenants were likely to 
have their rents lowered. Construction in and around 
Boston was mostly put on hold, except for some essen-
tial building projects. In the Hartford area, tenants asked 
to renew leases for very short periods or to postpone 
renewal decisions. In the investment sales market, pro-
jects in progress still happened, but new projects were 
pulled off the market or not initiated.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District 
slowed down in March and April due to the outbreak of 
COVID-19. For single family homes, closed sales de-
creased in all reporting areas and Rhode Island and New 
Hampshire experienced double-digit drops in pending 
sales. (Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and Maine report-
ed year-over-year changes from April 2019 to April 2020. 
Massachusetts and Boston reported statistics only 
through March. Connecticut and Vermont data were 
unavailable.) For condos, sales declined in all reporting 
areas but Boston. Nonetheless, a seller’s market pre-
vailed, with median sales prices increasing and inventory 
dropping substantially in all reporting areas for both 
single family homes and condos.  
The pause in market activity was expected by many 
contacts, since COVID-19 restrictions limited the availa-
bility of showings and squelched many sellers’ moving 
plans. Looking forward, contacts expressed generally 
optimistic views on the post-pandemic outlook but con-
siderable concern about near-term uncertainty related to 
lifting economic restrictions associated with the pandem-
ic.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional‐economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Second District economy contracted substantially again in the latest reporting period, as widespread closures and 
stay-at-home orders severely constrained business activity. Employment continued to decline, and wages were mixed 
but down modestly, on balance. Businesses reported that input prices rose slightly but selling prices decreased slightly. 
Activity fell in every sector, with particularly widespread declines in leisure & hospitality. However, business contacts 
tended to be less pessimistic than in the prior report about the near-term outlook, and those in the manufacturing, con-
struction, real estate, and health services sectors expected modest improvement. Consumer spending has fallen further, 
though there have been scattered reports of a nascent pickup in early May, as more parts of the economy have started 
to reopen. Tourism and travel have remained moribund, with hotels and airlines continuing to see very little business. 
Home sales and residential leasing activity have remained down sharply, as have commercial leasing and construction 
activity. Finally, banks reported further moderate weakening in loan demand, tighter credit standards, and higher delin-
quency rates but also greater leniency on existing loans.  
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained weak, as widespread 
layoffs have continued and hiring has been spotty. Two 
major employment agencies—one in New York City and 
another in upstate New York—noted that hiring was 
sluggish in April, though the latter noted a modest pickup 
in early May. A wide array of business contacts, as well 
as employment service firms, reported widespread 
layoffs and furloughs, especially at small to medium-
sized businesses. However, the vast majority of these 
were viewed as temporary, with workers expected to be 
re-hired when business activity rebounds. Some busi-
nesses have already made efforts to recall laid off work-
ers, as well as hire new workers. A number of these 
firms noted that this has been challenging, with many 
unemployed workers reluctant to return to work—some 
attributed this to generous unemployment benefits, as 
well as safety concerns.   
Reports from across business sectors remained nega-
tive. Contacts in leisure & hospitality, transportation, 
retail, and construction reported the most widespread 
staff reductions, while businesses in manufacturing, 
information, finance, and professional & business ser-
vices noted modestly declining staffing levels.  
Looking ahead, contacts in both manufacturing and real 
estate said they expect a modest pickup in employment, 
while those in leisure & hospitality, retail, finance, and 
professional & business services projected steady staff-
ing levels. Businesses across other sectors expected 
moderate staff cuts, on net, in the months ahead.   
Wages have mostly been flat to lower since the last 
report. Businesses in the hard-hit leisure & hospitality 
sector continued to report widespread reductions in 
wages, whereas contacts in health services and finance 
indicated steady to modestly rising wages. Contacts in 
other service industries reported modest declines in 
wages. 
Prices  
Input costs were mixed but up modestly, on balance, 
with a number of contacts noting extra costs associated 
with installing and maintaining safety protocols. As in the 
last report, selling prices were steady to down modestly. 
Businesses in leisure & hospitality noted fairly wide-
spread price cuts, while those in health & education 
services and wholesale trade characterized their selling 
prices as steady. Contacts in other sectors reported 
slight declines in the prices they receive.   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported further widespread drops in sales in 
April, with many malls and establishments still shut 
down, as those classified as non-essential were ordered 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
to close in March. With New York and New Jersey eas-
ing restrictions in recent days, some retailers have been 
allowed to reopen with curbside pickup. Retailers have 
also sometimes been able to shift to online sales, though 
often with much-reduced volume. Food, personal care, 
and other stores deemed essential have tended to fare 
better. Retailers expected sales to be steady to down 
modestly in the months ahead.   
Vehicle sales ground to a halt starting in mid-March, 
according to dealers in upstate New York, but picked up 
slightly into April, due to adoption of remote sales plat-
forms. Dealers reported a further pickup in the first half 
of May, as restrictions on showroom visits were eased 
somewhat. While essential dealer repair services re-
mained open, volume was much lower than usual. 
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturing, transportation, warehousing, and whole-
sale trade firms reported a further drop-off in business 
activity in recent weeks. However, there was substantial 
variation across segments, with those manufacturing and 
distributing essential goods faring much better than 
average. New York State and New Jersey are lifting 
restrictions on manufacturing before most other sectors.  
Looking ahead, manufacturers expect activity to re-
bound, while wholesale and transportation firms foresee 
further weakening in activity. Businesses have continued 
to cut both actual and planned capital spending.   
Services 
Service industry contacts reported continued widespread 
deterioration in business activity. Leisure & hospitality 
contacts reported particularly widespread declines in 
activity, as restaurants remained shut down for dine-in 
service and hotels suffered from an almost complete 
drop-off in travel and tourism.  
Contacts in professional & business services also indi-
cated steep declines in activity, while businesses in the 
information, health, and education sectors all reported 
more moderate, but still fairly widespread, declines.   
Looking ahead, business contacts continued to express 
great uncertainty about whether and when business 
would get back to reasonably normal levels, but there 
continued to be fairly widespread pessimism. A contact 
in air transportation expects any rebound in air travel to 
be slow and led by the leisure segment, noting a modest 
recent pickup in advance bookings for late 2020. A con-
tact in New York City’s tourism sector expects any re-
bound in visitations to be slow—particularly for interna-
tional visitors, the most profitable segment—noting that 
Broadway theaters are closed until at least Labor Day. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Home sales markets across the District have largely 
ground to a halt, with almost no new transactions and 
home viewing limited to virtual showings. The residential 
rental market has slowed but not quite as dramatically. A 
local real estate authority noted that new rental leasing in 
New York City was down about 70 percent, while renew-
als were up, and that there has been a pickup in demand 
for single-family home rentals outside the city. A major 
appraiser noted that it’s almost impossible to gauge 
changes in prices and rents during this pandemic due to 
a dearth of transaction activity.  
Commercial real estate markets across the District also 
remain moribund, with April marking a record low in new 
leasing activity and some companies pulling out of leas-
es. A contact at a major commercial real estate firm 
estimated that only about 10 percent of tenants in both 
office and industrial space have fallen behind on rent, 
thus far, but that the corresponding rate for retail tenants 
is well over 50 percent. Even beyond that, for some mall 
retailers, rent is assessed a share of sales revenue. 
More generally, real estate contacts were more optimis-
tic than contacts in other sectors about the near term 
outlook.   
New construction starts have essentially remained at 
zero, and ongoing construction projects remained 
paused, except where considered essential. However, 
this is likely to pick up as states ease restrictions on 
construction activity in the days ahead. 
Banking and Finance 
There was widespread interest, among businesses in all 
sectors, in the SBA Paycheck Protection Program loans, 
though some contacts expressed concerns about the 
program’s implementation and accessibility. Separately, 
small to medium sized banks across the District reported 
lower loan demand across all categories, but most dra-
matically from the commercial segment. Banks reported 
tightening credit standards across all categories except 
consumer loans. Loan spreads narrowed on all catego-
ries except C&I loans. Respondents reported wide-
spread declines in average deposit rates. Bankers re-
ported higher delinquency rates but more lenient policies 
for delinquent accounts across all categories.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Third District business activity continued to fall sharply during the current Beige Book period, as the COVID-19 pandem-
ic persisted across most of the mid-Atlantic region. Statewide stay-at-home orders and mandated closures of nonessen-
tial businesses remained in place for most of the current period. Economic contraction continued at a moderate or steep 
rate for manufacturing, services, and most consumer sectors; tourism fell modestly further to a near zero-level. Real 
estate sector activity was mixed. Firms continued to furlough or lay off workers even as Paycheck Protection Program 
(PPP) loans surged onto banks’ ledgers. The wage path remains unclear, although downward pressure may emerge 
once hardship pay is no longer needed. Prices fell modestly, as lower demand and low oil prices prevailed. As mandat-
ed closures begin to lift, firms are hopeful that business will resume. However, contacts are uncertain how fearful con-
sumers will be while the COVID-19 threat remains and how freely consumers will spend after the threat lifts. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to contract sharply. By mid-April, 
over half of the firms reported that employment had 
declined. A greater percentage reported a shorter aver-
age workweek. By the end of the period, about eight 
percent of the firms in our weekly survey reported that 
they had shut down. In other responses, almost 40 per-
cent ceased all hiring and 25 percent reported employee 
furloughs and reductions of employees’ average work 
hours.  
Staffing firms reported that activity was down in a range 
from 35 percent to 50 percent. One contact observed 
that over the course of a day, a recruiter might make 40 
calls to prior job candidates, speak with four, and hire 
one. In our weekly survey, just 10 percent of the firms 
reported that they had recalled furloughed workers. 
When asked about impediments to recalling workers, 33 
percent of the firms noted fear of infection and 25 per-
cent noted lack of childcare; overcoming the lure of 
expanded unemployment benefits was noted by 29 
percent of the firms.  
The path of wages continued to be unclear, as firms 
offered mixed reports of various wage strategies. Some 
firms are still paying premiums to attract and retain 
frontline workers. Other firms were forced to cut wages, 
hours, and overtime in order to survive. In mid-April, over 
one-third of the nonmanufacturing firms reported de-
creases in wage and benefit costs.  
Prices  
On balance, more contacts reported lower prices rather 
than higher during the period, except for spikes associat-
ed with scarcity and hoarding. However, well over half of 
all firms noted no change in prices.  
Falling demand and lower prevailing oil prices were cited 
as factors for generally lower prices. Price spikes were 
noted for fresh fruit. A Pennsylvania homebuilder ob-
served that the sector’s shutdown had compressed 
backlogs and increased short-term demand for materi-
als. An analyst for the transportation services sector 
noted that after having cut capacity in prior downturns, 
firms sometimes took the position expressed by one, “I’m 
not adding people, I’ll take it in price.”  
Manufacturing 
According to manufacturing contacts, the contraction 
became broader and steeper during the current period. 
At mid-April, about three-fourths of the firms reported 
decreases in shipments and in new orders.  
By the end of the period, three-fourths of the firms in our 
weekly survey reported that sales or new orders were 
down by greater than 5 percent of expectations prior to 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
the pandemic; one-third reported decreases in excess of 
30 percent or had shut down.  
According to several firms with global perspectives, 
supply chain problems have shifted from China to Mexi-
co. One contact observed that Europe and the U.S. will 
not recover as easily from the pandemic as China did 
and that many facility investments in the U.S. have been 
delayed. A key supplier noted that U.S. manufacturing 
activity is down nearly 20 percent and “moving sideways 
now.”  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales declined further, but the 
pace of decline was moderate, not steep as before. 
Where possible, retailers and restaurants have further 
ramped up delivery and take-out services. However, the 
first clutch of many anticipated restaurant closings was 
announced in the Philadelphia area as the period ended.  
Sales of new and used cars fell sharply again this period, 
but by early May, dealers and customers became more 
accustomed to online sales, which partially offset the 
steeper April decline. Sales, service, and profits are far 
below prior-year levels.  
After a full six weeks at a near standstill, tourism was 
modestly lower than the average of the entire prior peri-
od. A majority of hotels, resorts, and attractions remain 
closed. As of May 9, a tourism analyst estimated that 
weekly travel spending was down nearly 90 percent from 
prior-year levels in Pennsylvania, and down about 85 
percent in Delaware and New Jersey. Only as this period 
drew to a close were a few more attractions, such as 
beaches and golf courses, beginning to reopen.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Even more so than manufacturers, a broader cross 
section of service sector firms reported declining new 
orders/sales in the current period than before – resulting 
in another severe overall decline. At mid-April, almost 
nine-tenths of the firms reported decreases of sales or 
revenues, and two-thirds of the firms reported decreases 
of new orders.  
By the end of the period, over 70 percent of the firms in 
our weekly survey reported that sales or new orders 
were down by greater than 5 percent of prior expecta-
tions; nearly 40 percent reported decreases in excess of 
30 percent or had shut down. 
Financial Services 
The volume of bank lending grew rapidly over the period 
as commercial banks originated an enormous number of 
new loans to firms under the PPP. However, demand for 
consumer loans diminished and partially offset the PPP 
loan growth. Auto loans and other consumer loans fell 
moderately and steadily throughout the period; credit 
card volumes fell sharply throughout. By comparison, 
commercial and residential real estate lending trended 
about the same as in the same period one year ago.  
Banking contacts noted increased optimism among their 
clients after PPP loans had been widely disbursed. Our 
weekly firm surveys also reflected increasing optimism 
from early April, when 28 percent of the firms were very 
concerned about maintaining solvency over the next 
month, and early May, when 18 percent of the firms were 
very concerned. Bankers noted that existing aid, loan 
extensions, and forbearance would carry most firms for 
the next three to six months, but problems may arise in 
the third quarter. Contacts most often noted hospitality 
and hospitals among the sectors of greatest concern.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders maintained a lower level of construction 
activity similar to the end of the prior period, and Penn-
sylvania builders began restarting in early May. Builders 
noted that they were slowly converting most of their prior 
deposits into final contracts, but they were seeing too 
little traffic to sustain future activity.  
Existing home sales declined sharply. Real estate con-
tacts reported that potential sellers showed little interest 
in listing, much less showing, their homes, and fewer 
buyers were in the market. Brokers noted that credit 
markets were tightening and that interested buyers tend-
ed to be younger.  
Philadelphia’s commercial real estate construction grew 
slightly at lower levels as some projects started back up 
in early May; however, some sites chose not to restart, 
and other projects are slowing delivery. Contacts noted a 
decline in new plans and little commercial construction 
financing. “None of our normal metrics apply,” an analyst 
stated of the commercial sales/leasing market, which 
continued a modest decline. April rent collections, which 
were down somewhat for office and industrial space, 
were down significantly for retail space. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fourth District’s economy deteriorated further in the current reporting period after it contracted sharply in the previ-
ous period. Firms across a broad range of sectors reported declines in customer demand. The shuttering of physical 
stores and reduced travel because of the coronavirus pandemic kept sales weak for retailers and hospitality establish-
ments. Reduced foot traffic also hamstrung auto and home sales. Manufacturing orders declined, and producers 
slashed capital investments, although a number of contacts believe their current backlogs will tide them over until de-
mand improves. The slower pace of construction activity, reduced manufacturing production, and weak consumer 
spending resulted in low cargo volumes. Relatively strong areas of economic activity included grocery sales and busi-
ness lending. Firms responded to weak customer demand by reducing staff levels and in some case by cutting wages. 
Inflation pressures eased because of weak demand and lower commodity prices. A sizeable share of firms believed the 
worst declines in demand have passed. However, few expect a strong recovery given the uncertainty of the corona-
virus’s path. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment declined in a broad range of sectors as 
layoffs were widespread and hiring was limited to a 
handful of firms. Half of contacts reported decreasing 
staff levels during the current period, compared with 
about 40 percent that did so in March. Furthermore, only 
one-third of contacts who reduced staff levels expect to 
rehire close to the full number of separated staff when 
their businesses reopen. This expectation suggests 
employment is unlikely to climb back to pre-pandemic 
levels quickly after businesses reopen. Firms that held 
their staff levels flat tended to be in financial services, 
construction, real estate, or manufacturing. In several 
cases, firms in these sectors cited the Paycheck Protec-
tion Program as enabling employee retention. The few 
firms that increased staff included grocers, who saw an 
increase in at-home food demand and curbside pickup, 
and a couple of large banks that needed back-office 
support. Some retailers started to recall staff in limited 
numbers as businesses were allowed to reopen. One 
staffing firm reported that his clients were starting to 
increase hours or bring back workers who were laid off. 
 
Multiple contacts in a variety of industries noted addition-
al labor market challenges, including limited access to 
child care services keeping workers away from job sites, 
workers’ requesting to stay home out of fear of the virus, 
and unemployment benefits that disincentivized workers 
from rejoining payrolls. 
 
Overall, wage pressures were flat. Although the majority 
of firms left wages unchanged, one in five contacts re-
duced workers’ pay, a marked increase from the number 
of contacts who did so in the previous period. Wage cuts 
were concentrated in retail, real estate, professional 
services, and civic organizations. Multiple contacts re-
ported wage reductions of at least 10 percent for office 
workers or nonfurloughed staff. In cases in which wages 
increased, these increases tended to be for employees 
at a variety of banks, transportation firms, and manufac-
turers. These firms raised wages for people who contin-
ued to work on site, in a number of cases by $1 to $3 per 
hour.  
 
Prices  
Firms reported that input cost pressures eased because 
of lower prices for commodities such as oil, steel, cop-
per, cotton, and resins. The few cost increases that were 
reported included those for meat and some inputs for 
manufacturing and construction firms for which pockets 
of supply-chains were temporarily disrupted. One in four 
firms reduced selling prices because of weak customer 
demand and lower commodity prices. This was the case 
notably among residential builders who offered discounts 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
on homes, commercial real estate firms that reduced 
rents, and transportation firms that lowered their rates. 
Also, department stores and apparel retailers heavily 
discounted their prices.  
Consumer Spending 
Retail activity remained significantly lower than pre-
pandemic levels. Restaurants saw dramatic reductions in 
revenue because of the closure of dine-in services. Also, 
a sharp decline in business travel significantly reduced 
hotel bookings. Department stores and apparel retailers 
saw deep reductions in sales because of the shuttering 
of physical stores and were unable to fill the gap with 
online sales. One auto dealer reported that the impact of 
COVID-19 has been “unprecedented,” with total sales 
down 55 percent year over year. By contrast, grocers 
saw stronger demand as customers cooked more at 
home. Many contacts expect customer demand will 
improve somewhat as restrictions are lifted slowly. How-
ever, they feared consumer spending could be damp-
ened if unemployment remained high and concerns 
about contracting the coronavirus lingered.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing orders continued to slide. Several con-
tacts noted that the shutdown of automotive production 
was particularly painful; others reported that they antici-
pated long-lasting and adverse impacts to the aerospace 
and energy sectors. More than two-thirds of contacts 
indicated that capacity utilization is below its normal 
range, citing lack of demand, inefficiency brought on by 
social distancing, and difficulty convincing employees 
that it is safe to come to work. Manufacturers believed 
the worst declines in demand may have passed in April, 
though the outlook for the rest of the year was still down-
beat. Additionally, some contacts were optimistic that 
their current backlogs would tide them over until demand 
picks up again. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Construction activity fell for almost all residential and 
nonresidential construction firms. Backlogs for nonresi-
dential builders, that were heretofore relatively large, 
diminished, with one builder’s saying the pandemic 
caused 80 percent of the firm’s backlog to be postponed. 
Real estate agents reported weaker home sales be-
cause of slower foot traffic. One custom home builder 
tried selling homes online with limited success. Demand 
from first-time home buyers weakened because of a 
weak job market, and although interest rates are low, 
potential buyers were having a harder time qualifying for 
credit. One housing agency reported increased demand 
for rental and utility assistance.  
 
Looking ahead to the near-term, residential estate 
agents were more optimistic that single-family home 
demand would improve because of pent-up demand, low 
interest rates, and low inventories of homes. Also, a 
number of nonresidential builders expect delayed pro-
jects would come back online. Downside concerns in-
cluded reduced infrastructure spending because of de-
clines in state gasoline tax revenues. Also, higher educa-
tion institutions are facing fiscal difficulties that could 
lead to canceled projects. Finally, commercial real estate 
firms worry that relatively high rates of nonpayment of 
rent and rent deferrals will linger and depress profits. 
 
Financial Services 
Reports from financial services companies were mixed. 
Bankers saw large numbers of business-loan requests 
and draws on lines of credit in the second half of March, 
and while this activity slowed somewhat in April, it re-
mained robust. Several banks reported processing large 
numbers of Paycheck Protection Program loans. On the 
other hand, demand for consumer loans was down sig-
nificantly outside of heightened activity in home mort-
gage refinancing. A wealth management advisor noted 
that economic uncertainty drove increased demand for 
his services; however, another contact reported damp-
ened demand for insurance because of declines in busi-
ness activity and vehicle miles driven.   
Professional and Business Services 
Customer demand for professional and business ser-
vices was mixed. One online shopping consultant report-
ed an increase in demand in recent weeks, as did anoth-
er contact who provides legal and strategic advice. A 
corporate strategy advisor reported that customers have 
recently started enquiring about potential investment 
projects. By contrast, several contacts in a variety of 
industries such as advertising consulting, landscape 
development, robotics, and payroll support reported 
continuing subdued demand for their services. 
Freight Transportation 
Weaknesses in the manufacturing, construction, retail, 
and energy sectors resulted in weaker cargo volumes for 
freight companies. Contacts highlighted reduced auto 
and metal production as particular pain points. The diffi-
culty for transportation firms is exacerbated by the fact 
that freight volumes were already soft going into the 
pandemic. The few bright spots in the sector are limited 
to cargo for groceries and local and short-haul transpor-
tation. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region 
 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Fifth District continued to decline after the sharp fall reported in our previous Beige Book. Manu-
facturers experienced declines in shipments and new orders, as well as cancellations of exiting orders, leaving some 
with excess inventories. Ports saw steep declines in volumes compared to the same time last year although imports 
from China increased somewhat. Trucking companies had a moderate decline in volumes as the increases in shipments 
of essential supplies did not make up for the losses in other shipments such as retail goods. Most retailers reported very 
little sales compared to last year and were concerned about low demand persisting for some time. Travel and tourism 
remained depressed with hotels reporting little occupancy outside of some health care and construction workers. Some 
restaurants pivoted to carry-out sales, while others remained closed. Home sales declined moderately and inventories 
were further reduced from low levels as few new listings came on the market. Commercial real estate leasing also de-
clined moderately and some tenants requested payment deferments. Banks reported a slight decline in overall lending 
activity, but strong demand for CARES Act loans. Nonfinancial services firms reported a moderate decline in revenue 
and demand. Employment continued to decline sharply in recent weeks. Wages were little changed, overall, but there 
were a few reports of temporary wage increases or bonuses to keep workers on payrolls. Price growth slowed slightly 
but remained at a modest pace, overall.   
Employment and Wages  
Overall, employment continued to decline sharply in 
recent weeks. The only reports of firms hiring or looking 
to hire came from high demand industries, such as food 
manufacturing, logistics, cleaning services, and some 
segments of retail. Also, some employers noted that 
while they didn’t lay off staff, they did reduce the num-
ber of hours they worked. Others expressed difficulties 
retaining or rehiring workers because they had child or 
elder care responsibilities, or because it was more 
financially beneficial to collect unemployment insur-
ance. While there were few reports of permanent wage 
increases, there were several reports of employers 
temporarily increasing wages to retain essential on-site 
staff, to match the amount employees could earn on 
unemployment, or to reduce absenteeism.  
Prices  
Price growth slowed slightly but overall remained mod-
est. According to our most recent surveys, growth in 
prices received by firms slowed across manufacturing 
and service sectors. Conversely, growth in prices paid 
rose slightly for manufacturers and increased moder-
ately for services firms. Coal prices declined further in 
recent weeks, from already low levels, while oil and gas 
prices fluctuated but remained historically low. Agricul-
ture commodity prices mostly trended lower although 
prices paid by food manufacturers and consumers in-
creased for some food groups, like meat and eggs.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers reported steep declines in shipments and 
new orders since our last report. Firms also reported a 
rise in cancellations of existing orders, which led to in-
ventory build-up and a need for more storage capacity. A 
meat processor reported a decline in production as some 
plants shut down after employees tested positive for 
COVID-19. A prepared food manufacturer reported a 
decline in sales as panicked buying led customers to 
purchase frozen and canned foods, but was optimistic 
that people would start to transition back.  
Ports and Transportation 
Shipment volumes at Fifth District ports fell sharply rela-
tive to last year. Exports were hit especially hard, declin-
ing further in recent weeks from already low levels. Im-
ports were down over the year but recovered somewhat 
since our previous report as China resumed shipments. 
Automotive shipments were particularly weak as manu-
facturers were shut down and low oil prices softened the 
West African market for used vehicles. Contacts ex-
pected both imports and exports to remain low in the 
coming months. 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Trucking companies had a moderate drop in volumes 
since our previous report, and said volumes were down 
significantly from a year ago. Firms lost business from 
customers who were temporarily closed or faced de-
creased demand. Retail clothing, wine and convention-
related shipments were especially soft. Some weakness 
was also attributed to supply-chain disruptions from 
overseas. Declines were partially offset by increased 
shipments of food, building materials, medical and 
cleaning supplies, and cardboard shipping boxes. Spot 
market rates fell sharply, and some companies had to 
remove trucks from the road.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales in the Fifth District remained low in recent 
weeks and decreased greatly on a year-over-year basis. 
Many retailers were required to shut down temporarily, 
but were able to conduct business online or by appoint-
ment. Retailers expressed concerns about demand and 
looked for ways to encourage customers to safely return 
once they reopened, such as requiring and providing 
masks, extending hours, and implementing measures 
that allow for social distancing inside stores. Clothing 
retailers struggled with a build-up of seasonal inventory 
that will be hard to move in the coming months. 
Travel and tourism remained extremely weak since our 
last report, with sharp declines reported on a year-over-
year basis. Many hotels closed temporarily and those 
that were open saw low occupancy, which mainly came 
from healthcare workers and construction workers. 
Some contacts expected demand for tourism to come 
back strong because of pent-up demand. In parts of the 
Fifth District, advanced hotel bookings were up over the 
year for later this summer. Restaurants struggled as 
some were able to continue carry-out business, but 
others had to close. As restaurants were allowed to 
reopen with limited capacity, some opted to remain 
closed as operating at low capacity would not be profita-
ble.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Fifth District home sales declined moderately since our 
last report. Contracts that were underway before the 
health crisis moved forward, but fewer new sales were 
initiated. Inventories, which were already low, declined 
as potential sellers were reluctant to list and show their 
homes. There were a few reports of deals falling through 
because buyers failed to qualify for a mortgage as 
banks increased credit score requirements. Existing 
construction projects continued, but speculative building 
slowed, and contractors reported supply chain disrup-
tions. Realtors also reported logistical challenges with 
electronic and curbside closings.  
Fifth District commercial real estate leasing softened 
moderately in recent weeks. Landlords worked with 
tenants on rent deferments. Retailers, restaurants, and 
salons were especially likely to miss payments. Office 
leasing was also weak, as many tenants asked for defer-
ments, and businesses did not look for new space. Cur-
rent projects continued, but speculative construction 
softened. Demand for industrial leasing, on the other 
hand, was high. Multifamily leasing also remained 
strong, and some landlords allowed tenants to extend 
leases without added fees.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan activity declined slightly for this period. 
Respondents indicated tepid conditions for conventional 
commercial lending, but strong demand for Paycheck 
Protection Program (PPP) loans. Residential mortgage 
demand declined compared to the first quarter but was 
higher than a year ago, while mortgage refinance lending 
continued to grow moderately. Auto loans declined 
sharply on a year-over-year basis. Deposit growth was 
strong, mainly due to proceeds from federal aid dis-
bursements. Overall, credit quality remains good; howev-
er, a few bankers noted an uptick in 15-30 day past due 
payments and numerous requests for loan extensions, 
deferrals, and mortgage forbearances.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, nonfinancial services firms saw a moderate 
decline in demand and revenues since our previous 
report. Hospitals and health care service providers re-
ported sharp declines in revenues and total volumes, 
overall, because of the limitations on non-COVID-19-
related services such as elective surgeries. Higher edu-
cation institutions in the Fifth District also reported de-
clines in revenues, largely due to reimbursements made 
to students for forgone room and board. Demand for 
professional services were mixed. For example, an 
accounting firms saw a modest reduction in business 
while a marketing company said sales were up, although 
the number of clients was down. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/data_analysis 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts reported that economic activity continued to decline from April to early May due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Labor market activity remained weak and nonlabor costs declined overall. Retailers reported 
further declines in discretionary consumer spending, although sales of essential items continued to grow; ecommerce 
activity accelerated. Auto sales were subdued. Hospitality contacts noted record low revenues. Despite soft demand for 
new and existing homes, inventories fell and home prices remained steady. Commercial real estate market reports were 
mixed. Overall, manufacturing activity contracted and new orders declined significantly. Financial institutions reported 
growth in commercial loans as businesses accessed lines of credit and the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) and 
some softness in consumer lending. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall, District labor markets continued to deteriorate 
from closures related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
resulting decline in demand for products and services. 
Several contacts noted they were redeploying workers 
from low to high demand areas within their organization. 
Many contacts reported success in securing a PPP loan, 
which allowed them to avoid layoffs. Although more 
furloughs and layoffs were announced, most contacts 
were furloughing employees with medical benefits rather 
than laying off in hopes of re-engaging them when de-
mand returned. Several employers noted concern that 
the generosity of unemployment benefits may make it 
difficult to attract workers once demand improves espe-
cially among lower paid jobs. Most contacts noted that 
they had frozen or slowed hiring with the notable excep-
tion of high demand sectors such as grocery and home 
improvement stores.  
Contacts noted that weaker demand resulted in more 
reports of pay cuts, elimination of bonuses, and reduced 
hours; these cuts were more broad based than in the 
previous report. Some temporary increase in hourly 
wages and bonuses continued to be reported among 
high demand or essential workers, however there was 
no evidence that these inducements were increasing 
substantially or spreading to other sectors. 
Prices  
Most contacts reported input costs decreased over the 
reporting period due to the impact on demand from 
COVID-19. As demand shifted from restaurants to gro-
cers as a result of safer-at-home practices, some food 
service supply chains were left with excess inventories 
while others, such as meat processing and packing, 
experienced shortages. However, the majority of firms 
have not increased prices, either due to a lack of pricing 
power or as a show of goodwill to troubled consumers. 
The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey 
showed year-over-year unit costs declining to 1.2 per-
cent in April, as sales levels declined dramatically 
“compared to normal.” Year-ahead expectations, on 
average, declined to 1.4 percent. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Similar to the last report, continued declines in discre-
tionary consumer spending due to COVID-19 was par-
tially offset by sales growth in grocery and household 
products, office equipment, and home improvement 
goods. Ecommerce activity continued to accelerate as 
brick-and-mortar sales continued to decline. Reports 
from businesses in locales that were cleared to reopen 
indicated implementing social distancing measures and 
heightened sanitation efforts. While auto sales were 
muted, contacts noted that the rate of decline was slower 
than expected.  
Across the District, tourism and hospitality contacts 
reported that revenue per available room had reached a 
historical low for April as a result of COVID-19. Most 
contacts were in the process of developing their reopen-
ing strategy which would include marketing efforts and 
implementation of social distancing and elevated sanita-
tion, among other things. Firm reopen dates had not yet 
been determined and the general sentiment was that the 
recovery for this industry would be moderately slow. 
Construction and Real Estate 
The District housing market continued to show signs of 
significant disruption as a result of COVID-19. Contacts 
indicated a sharp overall decline in pending home sales, 
as well as a significant contraction in homes available for 
sale. Mortgage financing remained constrained as many 
lenders increased credit overlays. However, contacts 
suggested that purchase activity improved since the 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
 
 
beginning of April as more buyers sought to take ad-
vantage of low interest rates. Home prices remained 
resilient as sellers maintained asking prices. Though 
new home starts and sales were down sharply from a 
year ago, contacts indicated that cancellations were 
lower than expected and builders did not need to signifi-
cantly increase incentives in order to close sales. 
Commercial real estate (CRE) contacts reported continu-
ing challenges associated with the effects of COVID-19. 
Reports were mixed, as rent collections exceeded low 
expectations and investment activity continued to slow 
during the reporting period. Contacts continued to report 
a deceleration in new leasing inquiries, though leasing 
activity that was already in the pipeline appeared to be 
steadily continuing to move towards completion. Reports 
of a greater number of tenants seeking rent relief 
emerged. Declining tourism and travel conditions have 
had a significant impact on CRE activity across the Dis-
trict. Contacts reported that capital was readily available 
for financing stabilized CRE projects. Reports also indi-
cated that accurately appraising property values has 
become much more difficult and anticipate this to last 
through the remainder of the year. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing firms reported a decrease in overall busi-
ness activity, steered by a notable decline in new orders. 
To adjust to weakening demand, contacts described 
lowering production levels by reducing capacity and, in 
some instances, temporarily halting production at some 
of their plants. Some purchasing managers indicated 
they were experiencing delays in deliveries due to dis-
ruptions in supply chains. Across the board, contacts 
had or planned to implement enhanced safety proce-
dures at their plants to promote social distancing and to 
provide a sanitary work environment. 
Transportation 
Transportation activity weakened over the reporting 
period, and about half of contacts noted significant dis-
ruption to operations due to COVID-19. Air cargo compa-
nies reported further capacity reductions as more than 
roughly two-thirds of worldwide passenger flights were 
suspended. However, demand for air cargo services 
remained robust; thus, carriers operated cargo-only 
flights by using passenger aircraft to meet demand. 
Railroad contacts noted continued year-over-year de-
clines in overall traffic in petroleum and petroleum prod-
ucts, metals, lumber, and motor vehicles and parts. 
District ports cited continued softness in container cargo. 
Third-party logistic firms saw trucking volumes fall off as 
panic buying of essential consumer goods subsided. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions deteriorated slightly. 
While net interest margins remained stable, emerging 
credit issues related to COVID-19 prompted an increase 
in provisions for loan loss reserves, which significantly 
lowered earnings. Loan growth accelerated for the com-
mercial and industrial segment due to a combination of 
customer drawdowns of existing lines of credit and ap-
provals of new loans under the PPP. Both commercial 
real estate and construction loan growth declined due to 
weaker demand but remained positive. Residential real 
estate loan growth increased due to lower interest rates 
and a high level of refinancing. However, consumer loan 
growth declined due to lower demand and credit stand-
ards being tightened. Increased deposits and lending 
facilities created by the Federal Reserve System kept 
liquidity stable. 
Energy  
Oil and gas producers and servicers reported temporary 
closures of wells as global demand for crude oil re-
mained weak among historic oversupply. Utilization at 
refineries and chemical manufacturers was down to 
historic lows, aside from those used to make personal 
protective equipment, disinfectant, sanitizer, and other 
high-demand products related to COVID-19. Thus, refin-
ing and chemical manufacturing contacts reported 
layoffs, spending cuts, and maintenance delays. Reports 
indicated that widespread maintenance delays into the 
second half of the year will create added strain on limited 
maintenance contractors, staff, and equipment. Industrial 
construction contractors reported extensive project de-
lays and cancellations. While some energy contacts 
expect demand to rise in late summer, many noted that 
the industry will still have to contend with crude oil over-
supply and storage overhang. Utilities contacts reported 
decreased demand for power overall, largely from the 
commercial segment. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions softened. Most of the District 
remained drought free, with the exception of much of 
Florida, southern Louisiana, and other parts of the Gulf 
coast region, which experienced abnormally dry to se-
vere drought conditions. On a month-over-month basis, 
the April production forecast for Florida's orange crop 
was down from last month's forecast and last year's 
production, while the grapefruit production forecast was 
down from last month’s forecast but ahead of last year's 
production. The USDA reported that for March, year-over
-year prices paid to farmers were up for corn, rice, eggs, 
and milk but down for cotton, soybeans, cattle, and 
broilers. On a month-over-month basis, prices increased 
for broilers and eggs but decreased for corn, cotton, rice, 
soybeans, beef, and milk. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District declined sharply in April and early May, as the spread of the coronavirus 
caused major economic upheaval. Contacts were split over whether activity would decline further or pick up during the 
next 3 months, and they largely expected full recovery to take more than a year. Employment, consumer spending, 
business spending, construction and real estate, manufacturing, and agriculture all decreased substantially. Wages 
edged up and prices were little changed. Financial conditions improved modestly. 
Employment and Wages  
Total employment fell dramatically over the reporting 
period, with especially large declines in the retail, leisure 
and hospitality, and auto industries. That said, many 
contacts reported little change in employment, and a 
staffing firm that primarily serves manufacturers said that 
workers were beginning to return from furloughs. Many 
contacts who received a Paycheck Protection Plan 
(PPP) loan said that they were avoiding layoffs in order 
to qualify for the loan forgiveness provision of the pro-
gram. Still, a number of other contacts reported challeng-
es in meeting the PPP loan forgiveness requirement, 
with some saying that generous unemployment benefits 
were making it difficult to bring payrolls back to neces-
sary levels. Contacts again indicated they were making 
major changes in work environments to protect employ-
ees against the coronavirus. Wages edged up overall, 
with reports of workers at many essential businesses 
receiving bonuses or raises. Benefit costs were flat. 
Prices 
Prices were little changed in April and early May, though 
contacts expected modest price increases over the next 
12 months. Both retail and producer prices were flat 
overall, though grocery prices rose moderately and hotel 
room rates declined substantially. Input prices were 
largely unchanged, with the exception of shipping costs, 
which increased some. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending again decreased sharply over the 
reporting period. Nonauto retail sales declined consider-
ably, as sellers of non-essential goods remained closed 
in much of the District. Sales fell for almost all catego-
ries, with apparel, electronics, and furniture stores partic-
ularly hard hit. In contrast, grocery stores reported sizea-
ble increases in sales, and demand for home improve-
ment items was steady. E-commerce again saw very 
large gains. Light vehicle sales were much lower, as 
some dealerships remained closed. Sales picked up at 
dealerships that were open, though the pace remained 
well below that of a year ago. Consumption of services 
remained much lower than prior to the coronavirus crisis. 
Contacts in the food services, entertainment, tourism, 
and recreation sectors expressed deep concern about 
the upcoming summer season, noting that social distanc-
ing requirements were likely to put substantial limits on 
occupancy. 
Business Spending 
Business spending decreased significantly in April and 
early May. Retail inventories were well above comforta-
ble levels in most segments after sales fell dramatically, 
and many contacts cancelled the bulk of their orders for 
the short term. There were, however, reports of low 
inventories of groceries, household products, and home 
improvement products. A number of manufacturers said 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
that inventories were higher than desired. Capital ex-
penditures declined, and many contacts said they were 
suspending capital spending for the remainder of the 
year. Contacts continued to spend to support telecom-
muting. Demand for transportation services decreased 
moderately overall, as lower long-haul volumes out-
weighed increases in local delivery services. Commercial 
and industrial energy consumption declined moderately, 
with lower usage by retail stores, restaurants, and the 
auto industry. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity decreased substan-
tially over the reporting period. Residential construction 
decreased moderately—most projects that started before 
the coronavirus outbreak continued, but few new pro-
jects were started. Residential construction in Michigan 
restarted in early May after being suspended in late 
March, but contacts were concerned about the availabil-
ity of labor, in part because many workers had left the 
state during the suspension. Residential real estate 
activity decreased substantially. One contact noted 
heightened interest in moving out of urban areas. Home 
prices fell slightly, as inventories and the number of 
interested buyers both fell. Apartment owners reported 
fewer rent delinquencies than they had expected and 
believed generous unemployment benefits were helping. 
Nonresidential construction activity decreased moderate-
ly as most existing projects continued. Commercial real 
estate activity decreased significantly, with the largest 
drops in the retail and hospitality sectors. Prices were 
little changed, though contacts reported elevated uncer-
tainty over how to price many properties. Rents fell mod-
estly as vacancies and the availability of sublease space 
increased modestly. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production decreased substantially in 
April and early May. Auto production was very low as 
many assemblers and suppliers remained shut down. 
While many automakers in the US planned to resume 
production in the middle of May, there was concern over 
supply chains due to uncertainty about when factories in 
Mexico would reopen. Steel production declined precipi-
tously, driven by large declines in autos and oil and gas. 
Demand for specialty metals decreased moderately, as 
reduced orders from autos and aerospace outweighed 
slight increases from the medical and defense industries. 
Orders for heavy trucks continued to decline from their 
peak last year. Manufacturers of building materials saw a 
modest decrease in shipments, while manufacturers of 
packaging materials reported a large increase in de-
mand. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were mixed but improved modestly 
on balance. Participants in the equity and bond markets 
reported large gains over the previous reporting period, 
though volatility remained elevated. Business loan vol-
umes increased dramatically as banks processed a 
massive number of Paycheck Protection Program appli-
cations. Demand for other loan products decreased 
moderately. Quality deteriorated moderately overall, and 
contacts highlighted declines for the leisure, hospitality, 
dental, non-profit, agriculture, and energy sectors. 
Standards again tightened moderately. Consumer loan 
demand decreased moderately overall. Volumes were 
lower for most categories, but remained high for mort-
gage refinancing. One contact said that auto loan appli-
cations were up a good deal from March, though still well 
below normal levels. Loan quality again deteriorated 
slightly and standards tightened slightly. 
Agriculture 
Agriculture incomes fell over the reporting period as 
most commodity prices fell. Contacts reported disrup-
tions in the supply chain for meats, dairy, and vegeta-
bles. The disruptions were particularly notable for meats, 
as coronavirus outbreaks forced a number of packing 
plants to suspend operations. Some packers restarted, 
but output was substantially lower than a year ago. With 
no place to deliver market-ready animals, farmers were 
forced to slow herd growth (including by euthanizing 
hogs). On net, the supply disruptions led to higher prices 
and shortages of meat at grocery stores and restaurants, 
but lower prices for cattle and hogs. Milk prices also fell, 
with some producers dumping milk. Some ethanol plants 
accepted corn deliveries again, but corn prices remained 
low. Soybean prices also fell, but were favorable relative 
to corn, resulting in some shift toward planting beans. 
Planting progress was ahead of last year. Late freezes 
damaged some crops, particularly fruit trees. Farmers 
anticipated government programs would help during the 
downturn, but observers expected some distressed 
farms to be forced to liquidate. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have declined since mid-April, but at a moderately slower pace. While a very small fraction of firms 
had closed permanently, around half of firms remain closed temporarily. Among the firms that are closed, about one-
third expect to reopen in the next 3 weeks, one-quarter in the next 3 to 5 weeks, one-quarter in the next 5 to 10 weeks, 
and the remainder in more than 10 weeks. Firms that are reopening are often doing so for training and preparation 
purposes; less than one-fifth expect demand for their products or services to pick up in the next 5 weeks. Contacts’ 
general outlook for regional economic growth during the remainder of 2020 is pessimistic, as about two-thirds of con-
tacts expect growth to be slower than the same period in 2019.  
Employment and Wages  
Labor markets have continued to decline sharply over 
the reporting period, although the pace of decline has 
slowed considerably, with some contacts attributing 
employment stability to PPP funding. A payroll contact 
reported that new layoffs were driven predominantly by 
small firms, though many large employers have also 
furloughed workers since March—notably, several 
healthcare systems. Contacts reported that reopening 
firms were limited by labor shortages, which they as-
cribed to increased unemployment benefits, personal 
health concerns, and childcare responsibilities leading 
potential workers to stay home. 
Wages and other benefits were lower than in our previ-
ous report; a payroll company reported a “second wave” 
of wage cuts, and reports across industries have men-
tioned cuts to benefits, including employer 401k match-
ing. Some companies, especially those in competitive 
fields, have promised to repay lost wages at the end of 
the crisis; and others have increased wages to maintain 
morale and lure back hesitant workers. 
Prices  
Price pressures have decreased modestly since the 
previous report. On net, 16% of contacts reported that 
prices charged to consumers were lower in the second 
quarter relative to the same time last year. Nonlabor 
costs to businesses were generally unchanged, but 
some sectors did report significant increases: Wholesale, 
healthcare, and construction industries reported large 
net increases in nonlabor input costs. The healthcare 
industry in particular remains concerned about height-
ened prices for personal protective equipment because 
demand for these products has increased as other firms 
begin to reopen. 
Consumer Spending  
Consumer spending activity has been mixed but remains 
at historic lows. There have been slight upticks in activity 
for auto dealers and hotels in recent weeks. A furniture 
retailer expects to reopen in the coming weeks and 
expects that demand will pick up in the next month. A 
jeweler does not expect demand to pick up for another 
two months or longer and may not reopen. Hospitality 
contacts continue to report low or no activity throughout 
April. Tourism venues expect to remain closed for the 
next two months or longer.  
Auto dealers reported mixed activity over the past 
month. Some contacts cited stay-at-home orders and 
lack of inventory as reasons for low sales, while others 
reported that current-quarter sales are about the same 
as they were this time last year, noting that stimulus 
money and financing deals have helped bolster sales. 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Some dealers reported that demand has already picked 
up since the shutdown, while others anticipate it will take 
two months or longer to see an upward trend in demand. 
Manufacturing 
Reports from manufacturing contacts were mixed. How-
ever, levels of production remain very low. A steel manu-
facturer reported a 30% reduction in production, and a 
machine products manufacturer reported a 50% reduc-
tion in production. Both these contacts cited reduced 
demand as their biggest impediment. A printing company 
reported sharp increases in production from 15% to 80% 
of normal levels. Furthermore, several auto plants in the 
region have reopened or plan to reopen within a couple 
of weeks, but are working at 25% to 50% of normal 
production levels with supply chain disruptions.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has worsened 
moderately since the previous report. On net, about one-
third of contacts expect that it will take more than 10 
weeks for demand for services to begin to improve. 
Contacts in the healthcare sector reported severe drops 
in non-COVID-19 patient visits, by as much as 50% 
since March. Elective surgeries have been postponed by 
hospitals. Contacts reported furloughing between 5% to 
33% of their workforce. Contacts in primary care note the 
use of telehealth to replace some, but not all, patient 
visits.  
In the transportation industry, passenger activity in air-
ports is significantly lower but has ticked up slightly in 
recent weeks. Contacts noted a 95% drop year over year 
in passenger traffic. Airports have been able to remain 
open by making use of their cash reserves and relief 
funding from the CARES Act, by postponing capital 
expenditures, and with increases in cargo traffic. Con-
tacts in logistics and freight noted mixed activity. Con-
tacts linked to foodstuffs and online shopping noted 
increased activity, while contacts linked to retail trade 
and other sectors noted a drop in activity since the previ-
ous report. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity sharply declined in April 
as measured by existing home sales, new listings, and 
pending sales. Contacts reported drops in home sales 
between 8% and 50% in April relative to one year ago, 
despite sales conditions being generally unaffected by 
COVID-19 in March. Some brokers indicated that they 
have already experienced an uptick to near-normal 
sales. Home showings have rebounded from their lows 
in late March and early April. Inventory levels have de-
creased about 20% from the same time last year.  
A majority of contacts reported lower new residential 
construction demand compared with the previous year. A 
contact in Memphis reported few new projects in the 
pipeline. Contacts in Louisville and St. Louis reported 
that homebuilding remained stable in April because of 
the continuation of in-progress projects.  
Commercial real estate activity has moderately de-
creased since March. All contacts surveyed reported 
lower demand for retail space relative to the previous 
year. Contacts reported little change in the demand for 
industrial space and a moderate decrease in demand for 
office space. Some contacts expressed that despite 
sharp drops in the retail side of their business, continued 
industrial demand has been a bright spot for their firms. 
Contacts reported only a slight decline in rent collections. 
Contacts reported clients have suspended or delayed 
commercial construction projects. Contacts also reported 
difficulties with the construction process due to supply 
chain issues and increased safety costs.  
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have declined slightly 
after a surge in demand for emergency loans in April. 
Contacts reported the pipeline for PPP loans is now 
manageable. Demand for most consumer loans declined 
moderately, with the exception of credit cards loans, 
which modestly increased. Banks indicated a sharp 
increase in delinquencies, primarily in mortgages, credit 
cards, and auto loans; but they expect fewer delinquen-
cies in the third quarter. Louisville area bankers reported 
increasing loan loss reserves. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions have been mixed since 
April. Contacts reported that transportation and ware-
housing costs have increased and supply chain issues 
are affecting many producers. Smaller meat processing 
plants experiencing higher demand due to closures of 
larger plants are constrained by regulatory requirements. 
Contacts reported significant variation in revenue as 
some industries such as rice producers have seen in-
creased demand and prices for their goods. Meanwhile, 
cotton and other row crop producers reported lessened 
demand and continued low commodity prices, making 
profitability a challenge. Planting has increased since the 
previous reporting period and is up modestly from this 
time in 2019. However, this is largely due to improve-
ments in states that experienced historic flooding in 
2019.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity declined further after falling substantially in the previous report due to the COVID-19 
pandemic and response. Employment fell significantly, and wage pressures fell overall due to the steep decline in activi-
ty, while price pressures remained modest on balance. The District economy saw declines in consumer spending, tour-
ism, services, construction and real estate, manufacturing, energy, mining, and agriculture .  
Employment and Wages 
Employment fell significantly since the last report. Two 
surveys in May by the Minneapolis Fed found that April 
employment fell among a significant number of firms, 
and many expected additional staffing cuts by the end of 
the month. Although initial unemployment claims have 
fallen significantly in recent weeks, they remain much 
higher than normal levels. Mass layoff events have 
slowed after a deluge in April. For example, there were 
more than 60 mass layoff announcements in Wisconsin 
in April, many involving multiple locations. Through mid-
May, there have been only a handful of such 
announcements. Mass layoffs in Minnesota have 
followed a similar pattern. April job postings fell steeply 
in Minnesota and North Dakota. However, states that 
track job postings every week are showing evidence of a 
recent bounce-back. After dropping from mid-March 
through mid-April, job postings in South Dakota and 
Montana jumped significantly in late April and early May. 
Seasonal hiring has resumed with the gradual lifting of 
operational restrictions facing some businesses, but at a 
much lower level than normal. A Montana firm that 
normally hired 4,000 summer employees reported that it 
expected only about 1,000 this year. Ironically, staffing 
firms with job orders reported difficulty finding workers.  
Wage pressures fell due to the steep decline in overall 
activity. A Districtwide survey of firms found that more 
than one-quarter have implemented some level of wage 
cuts, and a similar share of firms expected additional 
wages cuts over the coming three months. Firms in 
Minnesota had a higher incidence of wage cuts, while 
firms in the Dakotas saw a notably lower share. A 
Minnesota manufacturer cut wages by almost 4 percent 
for most workers, with senior management and 
managers taking pay cuts of 10 percent to 20 percent.    
Prices  
Price pressures decreased on balance. Trucking firms 
reported that freight rates have fallen, in many cases 
dramatically, due to a contraction in demand for 
shipping. North Dakota crude oil prices as of mid-May 
were down 50 percent from their levels a month earlier. 
However, retail fuel prices in District states ticked up in 
recent weeks after declining in April and were roughly 
unchanged as of mid-May relative to the previous report. 
Manufacturing contacts continued to report that prices 
for raw material inputs were stable; however, a beverage 
bottler reported concerns that supply chain disruptions 
for plastic and aluminum would feed through to container 
prices. Recent spot prices for livestock and dairy have 
fallen precipitously, and restaurant and institutional food 
service shutdowns have roiled the agricultural supply 
chain.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending declined significantly since the last 
report due to shelter-in-place guidelines and other 
factors that limited normal activities. Multiple surveys 
have shown steep revenue declines at restaurants, bars, 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
lodging, and retail establishments. A survey in late April 
found that one-third of Minnesota tourism firms reported 
no revenue over the past 30 days. Hotel occupancy in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul has hovered around or below 20 
percent for the past two months. Hotel bookings in 
Montana were also reported to be very low in April and 
May. Consumer spending conditions appeared to be less 
severe in the Dakotas, where businesses faced fewer 
operating restrictions. Nonetheless, South Dakota 
tourism tax receipts were down by almost 30 percent in 
April. There were modest signs of uptick—from very low 
levels—in some consumer spending areas. For example, 
vehicle titles and liens registered in Wisconsin have risen 
for four consecutive weeks. TSA screenings at airports 
Districtwide were showing small improvements after a 
freefall in passenger activity. Some hotels in Montana 
and other high-tourism areas reported improvements in 
reservations toward the end of June and into July. 
Activity at restaurants and other consumer-facing 
businesses was also returning slowly in May as District 
states lifted restrictions at varying rates.  
Services 
Activity in the services sector decreased. In a recent 
survey of Ninth District businesses, 75 percent of 
professional services firms reported decreased sales in 
April relative to a year earlier. A railroad reported that 
total April volumes were down more than 20 percent 
from a year earlier. A strong majority of trucking firms 
reported that sales decreased by 25 percent or more in 
April relative to a year earlier; expectations for May 
activity were slightly positive compared with April, but 
substantially down from May 2019. In contrast, a contact 
in the Great Lakes maritime shipping industry reported 
that orders remained strong.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction fell since the last report. An 
industry tracker of construction projects showed a 
modest dip in activity in April and early May. But other 
sources suggested a bigger decline. More than two of 
three respondents to a mid-May survey of Minnesota 
construction firms said they have had recent or future 
projects canceled, and an even higher share have seen 
other projects delayed. Respondents also reported a 
reduced number of new projects out for bid. Some major 
projects also moved forward, including a $1 billion 
project to reconstruct shipping locks on the eastern edge 
of Lake Superior. Residential construction was lower, but 
showed some positive signs. The aforementioned survey 
suggested that many Minnesota housing contractors 
were seeing project delays. At the same time, single-
family permitting remained active in many of the District’s 
larger markets, with Minneapolis-St. Paul, Sioux Falls, 
S.D., and Bismarck and Fargo, N.D., all seeing healthy 
growth in April permits compared with a year earlier.  
Commercial real estate activity fell since the last report. 
Slower economic activity was negatively affecting all real 
estate categories, but particularly retail and office space. 
Vacancy rates were expected to increase across the 
board as leasing activity slowed. Among industry 
subsectors, industrial space was reported to be faring 
the best, in part because of increased e-commerce 
demand for warehouse space, both currently and going 
forward. Rent collections were “top of mind,” among 
contacts. A multifamily property manager reported that 
rent delinquencies were elevated in May, but by less 
than expected, and reflected an improvement over April 
levels. Residential real estate was mixed. Home sales in 
Minnesota rose 1 percent in April over a year earlier. 
Sales elsewhere over this period were higher in northern 
Wisconsin, Fargo, Sioux Falls, and Great Falls, Mont., 
but lower in western Wisconsin, Grand Forks, N.D., and 
Missoula and Bozeman, Mont.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity decreased further. An index of 
manufacturing conditions indicated substantially 
decreased activity in April compared with a month earlier 
in Minnesota and the Dakotas; employment contracted 
sharply. Three in five manufacturers responding to a 
survey of District firms reported decreases in sales by 25 
percent or more in April compared with a year earlier. 
Suppliers of inputs to the oil and gas industry reported a 
severe contraction in demand.    
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions worsened. Reports 
continued to surface of producers euthanizing animals or 
placing them on restrictive diets due to pandemic-related 
closure of livestock slaughter plants. More than two-
thirds of Ninth District agricultural lenders reported that 
farm incomes decreased in the previous three months 
relative to a year earlier, with a similar share reporting 
decreased capital spending, according to the 
Minneapolis Fed’s first-quarter (April) survey of 
agricultural credit conditions. Oil and gas activity, already 
in decline prior to the pandemic, contracted severely as 
demand fell. The number of active drilling rigs in the 
District as of early May was less than half the level 
during the previous reporting period. Multiple District iron 
ore production facilities shut down operations as 
domestic steel production declined. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity declined substantially since the previous survey, and contacts remained pessimistic about 
activity levels in the months ahead despite some easing of restrictions related to COVID-19. Consumer spending de-
creased at a faster pace in April and early May, with particularly weak sales at auto, restaurant, tourism and healthcare 
establishments. Manufacturers reported a record drop in activity as production plunged at both durable and non-durable 
goods plants in April. Transportation, wholesale trade, and professional and high-tech services contacts also reported 
lower sales, and additional declines were anticipated in the months ahead. Residential and commercial real estate activity 
dropped significantly, and construction activity fell at a modest pace. Energy activity declined further as firms announced 
well shut-ins to lower oil production. The agriculture sector also weakened further as disruptions at meat-packing plants 
worsened and cattle and corn prices declined sharply. District employment fell sharply over the past two months, but the 
pace of job losses moderated some in the last couple of weeks. Wages fell modestly, and input and selling prices de-
clined across most District sectors.            
 
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours were down 
moderately compared to the prior survey period and 
were substantially below year-ago levels. After a dra-
matic spike in initial claims for unemployment insurance 
in late March and April, the number of new claims de-
clined in recent weeks but remained historically high. 
However, contacts in all sectors, with the exception of 
retail trade and real estate, expected continued declines 
in employment over the next few months, albeit at a 
more moderate pace.  
A majority of respondents continued to report no labor 
shortages, but some contacts did note difficulties finding 
truck drivers and hourly food-service workers. Wages fell 
modestly, but slight gains were expected in the coming 
months.                 
Prices  
Input and selling prices declined across most District 
sectors in April. However, retail trade contacts noted 
modest growth in both input and selling prices. Input and 
selling prices declined slightly in the restaurant sector, 
but were expected to rise moderately in the next few 
months. Transportation contacts reported moderately 
lower input and selling prices and expected both to fall 
further in the months ahead. Construction supply re-
spondents noted a moderate decline in selling prices and 
expected a slight drop in prices going forward. Manufac-
turers reported slightly lower prices for both finished 
products and raw materials prices, but expected prices 
to pick up slightly in the coming months.                
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending decreased at a steeper pace since 
the last survey period as regional businesses continued 
to be negatively affected by COVID-19. Sales declined 
further in auto, restaurant, and tourism sectors, and most 
grocers and pharmacies reported some decline since the 
last survey as well. Activity remained low for District 
health services, with fewer sales and fewer hours, while 
input prices were higher than a year ago. Auto sales 
were down for all contacts compared with a year ago, 
and contacts expected inventory levels to expand further 
due to low sales expectations in the near term. Com-
pared with the previous survey and a year ago, restau-
rant sales and employment levels contracted sharply. 
The hotel and tourism sector experienced steep losses 
due to COVID-19 shutdowns of non-essential business-
es. Nearly all firms reported taking measures to cover 
shortfalls in revenues experienced as a result of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and over two-thirds applied for the 
SBA PPP loan program. Expectations for future consum-
er activity improved only slightly compared with the 
previous survey period, and remained historically low.           
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity fell at a record pace in April as 
COVID-19 continued to weigh on firms. The decrease in 
manufacturing activity was steepest at durable goods 
factories such as primary and fabricated metals, but 
activity at non-durable goods plants including food and 
beverage manufacturing also declined. Production, new 
orders, employment, and raw materials inventories all 
dropped further compared to the previous survey period 
and year-ago levels. On the other hand, supplier delivery 
time increased. More than two-thirds of factory contacts 
reported applying for SBA PPP loans. However, a num-
ber of firms had not received funds by late April. Expec-
tations for future activity rose compared to the last sur-
vey period, but remained slightly negative.  
Outside of manufacturing, sales decreased for firms in 
the transportation sector, and several firms reported 
layoffs and increased use of paid time off for employees 
since the previous survey period. Recent sales declined 
for wholesale trade, but remained around year-ago lev-
els. Sales were also down for professional and high-tech 
services sectors in April and were below year-ago levels. 
Expectations in the transportation, wholesale trade, and 
professional and high-tech services sectors remained 
very negative, as firms anticipated significantly lower 
sales, employment levels, capital expenditures, and 
prices in coming months.                 
Real Estate and Construction  
Residential and commercial real estate activity declined 
substantially since the previous survey, while construc-
tion activity fell modestly. Residential sales decreased 
sharply as stay-at-home orders reduced buyer traffic. 
New listings also fell significantly, and inventories were 
well below year-ago levels. Despite a decline in activity, 
home prices held steady and remained above year-ago 
levels. Home showings increased significantly over the 
past couple of weeks as restrictions eased, and residen-
tial real estate activity is expected to pick up modestly in 
the coming months. Residential and commercial con-
struction activity declined modestly, and construction 
supply firms noted a slight increase in sales due to a pick
-up in home improvement projects. Commercial real 
estate conditions deteriorated as vacancy rates in-
creased, while absorption and sales declined. Access to 
credit was more difficult than last year, and overall com-
mercial real estate activity was projected to worsen 
significantly in the next few months.    
Banking 
Since the last survey, loan demand continued to decline 
modestly and credit standards increased somewhat 
across most loan categories. Bankers indicated a sharp 
decrease in the demand for consumer loans and com-
mercial real estate loans, while reporting a modest de-
crease in agriculture loans and a slight decrease in 
commercial and industrial loans. By contrast, bankers 
noted a slight increase in residential real estate loan 
demand. Loan quality declined moderately from a year 
ago and was anticipated to decrease significantly over 
the next six months. Bankers continue to carefully moni-
tor the effects of COVID-19 on the local economy.                
Energy 
Energy activity collapsed further since the previous 
survey, and expectations for future drilling and business 
activity remained negative. Revenues decreased and 
capital spending plans declined. The number of active oil 
and gas rigs in the District fell dramatically to historic 
lows as firms announced well shut-ins to ease produc-
tion levels. The sharp drop in demand for energy produc-
tion due to the global pandemic continued to weigh on 
the outlook for energy activity. Low oil and gas prices 
also remained an issue for District firms, negatively 
impacting profitability. Most firms did not expect energy 
price levels to pick up significantly in the near term, and 
expectations for rig counts and employment levels re-
mained subdued.                 
Agriculture 
The farm economy in the Tenth District weakened further 
alongside developments related to COVID-19. As of the 
second week of May, roughly a quarter of U.S. meat-
packing and food processing plants with confirmed 
COVID-19 cases were located in the District. As disrup-
tions in meat and food supply chains worsened and a 
substantial slowdown in ethanol production continued, 
cattle and corn prices declined sharply through early 
May. Alongside significant reductions in demand for corn 
used in ethanol, corn supply also was forecasted to be 
the largest on record in 2020. Contacts reported that 
weak market conditions likely will have major implica-
tions for producer cash flows in coming months. Despite 
a more pessimistic environment, farmland values in the 
region remained relatively steady.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Eleventh District economic activity contracted sharply in April, while preliminary data from May point to a notable easing 
in the pace of decline as restrictions on businesses were gradually lifted. Activity in the energy and service sectors 
remained the hardest hit. Manufacturing output and new orders fell further, though food manufacturing continued to 
increase. Loan volumes contracted broadly, with the exception of residential mortgages and SBA’s PPP funds. Home 
sales fell sharply from mid-March through mid-April but have been improving from low levels since then. Employment 
and hours worked continued to plummet, pressuring wages. While input costs were flat to slightly up, food processors 
noted a large increase in meat prices. Selling prices dipped further. Preliminary results from a May Dallas Fed Survey of 
Texas manufacturing and service firms indicated that current revenue levels for most respondents were down markedly 
compared with a typical May, and about a fifth said they would not be able to survive past six months if revenues did not 
improve. Outlooks remained weak due to uncertainty surrounding the pace and scope of the reopening of the District 
economy. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment declines were steep, spanning all metros 
and most industries. An April Dallas Fed survey of 400 
Texas businesses in the services and manufacturing 
sectors showed that 47 percent of respondents had 
either temporarily or permanently laid off workers and 63 
percent had cut hours. Energy contacts said oilfield 
workers were being furloughed or laid off in tandem with 
declining activity, and cuts were also widespread at 
corporate offices. A large rail firm said they have fur-
loughed about 5,000 workers due to decreased traffic, 
and there were a few reports of employment cuts in real 
estate and construction. In contrast, a food manufacturer 
noted difficulty finding workers and a few finance firms 
said they were adding employees or using overtime to 
process PPP loans. Some companies said PPP funding 
had helped them hold on to employees.  
Firms that were beginning to call workers back said that 
fear of infection, lack of childcare, and generous unem-
ployment insurance (UI) benefits were preventing some 
workers from returning. A few staffing firms noted difficul-
ty recruiting due to increased UI benefits. Wages were 
flat to down, with auto dealers and energy firms among 
others noting reduced benefits and pay.  
 
Prices 
Input costs were flat to slightly up except for meat pro-
cessing, where contacts noted significant upward price 
pressures. Weak demand for most products and ser-
vices further depressed selling prices, though there were 
reports of rising costs of PPE and related supplies. 
Some firms noted making cost reductions to conserve 
cash. Airlines reported further discounting of tickets. Rail 
shipment rates for some commodities rose, but pricing 
for most others dipped. New home prices were flat 
though realtor bonuses and incentives were being of-
fered. Staffing firms reported no change in bill rates.  
Manufacturing  
Output declines steepened in April, but preliminary data 
suggest that the pace of contraction slowed markedly in 
May. Declines spanned durables and nondurables, but 
manufacturers of transportation equipment and those 
tied to the oil and gas sector were among the hardest hit. 
Refinery utilization rates fell to 70 percent in April, well 
below the normal run rate of over 90 percent. Margins 
remained depressed and petrochemical manufacturers 
noted deferring maintenance and/or delaying construc-
tion projects to preserve capital. Only food manufactur-
ers continued to cite growing demand. Overall outlooks 
remained starkly negative due to heightened uncertainty 
surrounding return to normalcy and post-pandemic con-
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
sumer demand.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales dipped further due to business closures and 
overall weak demand, with only a handful of contacts 
noting an improvement from low levels. Several firms 
also mentioned the weakness in the oil and gas industry 
as a headwind. Auto sales plunged in April and remained 
sluggish in early May, though some dealers noted a 
pickup in demand. Outlooks remained bleak and uncer-
tain, mainly centered on the speed and extent of the 
recovery.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector remained depressed, 
though the rate of decline appeared to moderate in May 
relative to April. A few firms that cited rising revenues 
noted strong backlogs, increased demand stemming 
from the current economic distress, or a pickup in de-
mand from a very weak April. Firms noting continued 
weakness generally reported low levels of demand, 
particularly in travel, accommodation, and food services. 
Among restaurants, those with no drive-thru infrastruc-
ture were the most impacted. Airlines said passenger 
demand was flat during the reporting period; however, it 
is down 90 percent compared to year ago levels. Do-
mestic travel was mainly limited to essential workers, 
while overseas traffic largely consisted of cargo. Rail, air, 
and sea cargo volumes decreased year-over-year as 
well as during the reporting period. Staffing firms saw a 
drop off in orders, though there were reports of in-
creased demand for workers in healthcare, nursing, 
logistics, and trucking. Service sector outlooks were 
largely pessimistic.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Existing-home sales fell sharply in April and listings were 
down as well. New home sales plummeted from mid-
March to mid-April but have been rising since then partly 
due to low mortgage rates. Despite the pickup, sales are 
generally running below plan. Home showings are either 
virtual or by appointment. Builders said cancellations 
have slowed in recent weeks from the highs seen in late 
March and early April. Some supply chain issues were 
noted due to plant closures. Several new land and lot 
deals were cancelled or on pause, spec building has 
slowed, and existing lot contracts were being renegotiat-
ed due to heightened uncertainty and the need to pre-
serve cash. Outlooks remained weak, though they have 
improved slightly in recent weeks.  
Multifamily contacts said rent collections in April and 
early May were ahead of expectations. Leasing activity 
was sluggish but was picking up, and rent concessions 
had increased. Office leasing activity slowed, particularly 
in Houston. Investment sales were sluggish and capital 
for new development has mostly dried up as investors 
take a wait-and-see approach. 
Financial Services 
Loan volumes contracted broadly, with the exception of 
PPP and residential real estate loans. Loan pricing con-
tinued its marked decline, and credit standards tightened 
considerably. Loan performance eroded across all loan 
types, and 83 percent of respondents expected further 
deterioration. Well over a third of bankers observed 
increased use of existing lines of credit due to COVID-
19, up from 25 percent last period. On average, bankers 
said 13 percent of their clients were receiving loan pay-
ment deferrals. A majority of respondents have made 
SBA PPP loans to businesses, and most cited adminis-
trative or technology related challenges in processing 
and/or distributing PPP funds. Outlooks remained nega-
tive. 
Energy 
Eleventh District drilling and completion activity fell to 
record lows during the reporting period as depressed 
prices and storage constraints forced many firms to shut-
in production. Smaller exploration & production firms 
reported idling most of their fracking crews and larger 
firms said they have been idling about half of them. 
Bankruptcies are expected to spike due to ongoing fund-
ing constraints. Contacts indicated that activity may be 
nearing a bottom, but recovery will likely be slow due to 
expectations of low crude oil prices through 2021.  
Agriculture 
Soil moisture levels remained favorable across most of 
the district, except for South Texas where there was 
drought. Wheat remained a bright spot with higher pric-
es, strong demand, and solid yield prospects. Prices fell 
for other grain crops, particularly corn, due to declining 
ethanol demand. Contacts noted some concern for 2020 
revenues in part due to lower grain prices. Reduced 
meat processing capacity due to social distancing 
measures and plant closures translated into lower de-
mand and prices for cattle, even as beef prices soared. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District contracted markedly during the reporting period of April through mid-May. Most 
businesses reported dramatic employment declines, due to disruptions related to the COVID-19 outbreak. Changes in 
wages were mixed. Price inflation was generally muted with exceptions in a few sectors. Sales of retail goods declined 
sharply, and activity for providers of consumer and business services contracted noticeably. Manufacturing contracted 
moderately, and activity in the agriculture sector slowed further. Conditions in residential real estate were mixed, while 
the commercial market showed a notable decline in activity. Lending activity increased moderately, fueled by Paycheck 
Protection Program (PPP) loans.  
Employment and Wages  
Business disruptions related to the COVID-19 outbreak 
caused a surge in layoffs and furloughs over the report-
ing period. Many nonessential businesses reported 
double-digit percent reductions in their employment 
levels as well as cancelled hiring plans. Businesses in 
the entertainment, food services, retail, and tourism 
sectors were among the more severely affected. A large 
specialty retailer laid off or furloughed 85 percent of its 
employees. Conversely, some banks either maintained 
or increased hiring levels to accommodate increased 
demand for PPP loans. Some customer-facing essential 
businesses mentioned that some separations came at 
the request of employees who were afraid of contracting 
the coronavirus. Other contacts noted that some work-
ers’ current ability to receive more income through un-
employment insurance and other social programs than 
through employment has hindered employee retention 
and rehiring efforts. Contacts across the District reported 
cutting workers’ hours. Work arrangements became 
more flexible where possible, including teleworking and 
expanded leave periods. A banker in Central California 
recorded increases in worker absences of up to 10 per-
cent primarily due to a lack of available childcare. A 
payment processing firm reported that job applications 
for current openings soared, though many candidates 
did not have the stated requirements. 
Wages declined at some firms, but many reported no 
changes in hourly rates or salaries. A Southern Califor-
nia hotel reduced workers’ pay by up to 40 percent. 
Building materials manufacturers and transportation 
providers either suspended or postponed bonuses, merit 
increases, and cost-of-living adjustments. Some small 
businesses said that PPP loans helped them maintain 
their wages at current levels. A Seattle firm reported 
offering hazard pay bonuses to 87 percent of its work-
force.  
Prices  
Most contacts reported stable prices over the reporting 
period. Uncertainty about the timing of a rebound in 
activity inhibited price movement overall. However, pric-
es for building materials increased modestly on balance 
with new construction projects restarting near the end of 
April in some areas. Hard-to-find products at grocery 
stores also showed some price increases. In contrast, 
contacts noted lower prices at gas pumps and heavy 
discounting at restaurants and hotels. Steel prices de-
clined sharply due to a slowdown in auto manufacturing. 
Widespread closures at processing facilities generated 
oversupplies of livestock and dairy inputs and decreases 
in prices paid to farmers.    
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales across a variety of sectors fell by double-
digit percentages in general as nonessential brick-and-
mortar stores largely remained closed. Sales of many 
consumer goods have shifted heavily to online platforms, 
including footwear, pet care products, and seasonal 
merchandise. Online sales partially attenuated the im-
pact of sharply reduced in-person sales. Big box retailers 
that remained open faced supply chain disruptions for 
some goods including paper and cleaning products. 
Demand for certain specialty home products such as do-
it-yourself home improvement supplies and gardening 
materials remained stable or even increased. Auto deal-
ers in the Mountain West reported a sales pickup in late 
April and early May compared with prior weeks, espe-
cially for larger vehicles such as trucks and SUVs, 
though inventory remained tight. 
The Beige Book ■ May 2020 

L-2
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
Activity in consumer and business services contracted 
noticeably. Transportation fell moderately with the ex-
ception of residential delivery services. Restaurants 
remained closed apart from those able to offer take-out 
alternatives. Hotels, sports venues, in-person education-
al institutions, daycare centers, and movie theaters 
remained largely nonoperational. Spending on most 
discretionary medical services halted, but demand for 
mental health and veterinary services remained robust. 
In the Pacific Northwest, consumers avoided cash heavy 
expenditures such as auto repair services. A contact in 
the Pacific Northwest also warned of reduced local gov-
ernment revenue collection and its implication for poten-
tial cuts in fiscal spending and public services. In the 
entertainment sector, demand for broadcasting and 
voice-over services increased.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity declined moderately. Reduced 
global industrial activity negatively impacted sales, avail-
ability of raw materials, distribution networks, and capac-
ity utilization. Demand for finished steel products de-
creased significantly, driven primarily by a suspension in 
auto production and lower demand from energy produc-
ers. A large metal manufacturer in the Pacific Northwest 
mentioned that capacity utilization is now below the long-
term U.S. average. Manufacturers of building products 
saw reduced sales and limited production schedules, 
though one producer observed a pickup in demand as 
construction sites reopened in late April in some areas. 
Renewable energy machinery manufacturers cut their 
domestic production by up to half following health and 
safety concerns for their workers. Fruit, meat, and dairy 
producers across the District faced supply chain disrup-
tions and production bottlenecks following the closure of 
many processing and packing facilities.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries 
Activity in the agriculture sector slowed further over the 
reporting period. Domestic demand from the commercial 
food sector continued to be just a fraction of what it was 
before the COVID-19 shock. Potato and barley growers 
in Idaho faced reduced sales to distributors who had 
retained leftover inventory from the previous season. 
Fruit growers in California saw some increased demand 
from food banks, social service providers, and govern-
mental programs, but, a decline overall in domestic 
demand. Timber producers in the Pacific Northwest also 
saw a pullback in domestic demand for logs due to the 
slowdown in manufacturing activity. On the supply side, 
some producers in Idaho and Arizona have reduced live 
animal herd sizes in response to bottlenecks at meat 
processing plants. Agricultural export markets were 
similarly downbeat. Milk exports declined notably. Slow-
downs in the entertainment and restaurant sectors 
abroad hit exports of nuts and raisins. Energy producers 
saw steep declines in industrial and commercial de-
mand, but rapid increases in residential usage. Timber 
loggers witnessed some additional demand from Asian 
markets facing reduced supply from other western coun-
tries.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential construction activity was mixed on net. After 
a temporary halt in construction, residential projects 
restarted in some areas in late April or early May, de-
pending on local social distancing relaxation schedules. 
Overall, home sales slowed dramatically and inventories 
decreased as sellers held back amid in-person home 
tour restrictions. Nonetheless, a few local markets in 
California and Idaho continued to see strong home 
sales, especially within higher price ranges. Uncertainty 
around future construction and sales remained high. A 
contact in Southern California mentioned that residential 
rent prices were flat or even down slightly as tenants 
sought and gained payment concessions. 
Commercial construction activity declined notably 
throughout the District. Reports highlighted that weak 
business prospects for restaurants, hotels, and other 
commercial venues have severely depressed commer-
cial construction and permitting across a large portion of 
the District. One contact in Idaho emphasized that com-
mercial projects were only postponed, as opposed to 
terminated, mostly due to delays in the delivery of build-
ing materials.     
Financial Institutions 
Overall lending activity increased moderately, fueled by 
PPP loans. Financiers reported that, outside of PPP 
loans, the level of regular commercial loan origination fell 
modestly as firms focused instead on drawing down 
preexisting lines of credit and applying for loans through 
the federal relief program. Contacts noted that banks’ 
participation in the federal program has increased, 
though uncertain guidelines have discouraged engage-
ment in the program somewhat. Some banks continued 
to offer PPP loans to existing customers only. Reports 
mentioned that loan repayment deferral requests contin-
ued to soar. Credit quality remained generally stable 
though. A banker in Central California did record in-
creased loan write-offs. Refinancing activity for residen-
tial mortgages was robust following a decrease in inter-
est rates. Even though application requirements tight-
ened, credit remained widely available for first mortgag-
es and refinances in most areas within the District. Ven-
ture capitalists reported they were scrutinizing start-up 
financing more strictly both for new investment and 
continued funding. ■ 


