The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
January 17, 2018 
January 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta based 
on information collected on or before January 8, 2018. This document 
summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal 
Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal 
Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Reports from the 12 Federal Reserve Districts indicated that the economy continued to expand from late November 
through the end of the year, with 11 Districts reporting modest to moderate gains and Dallas recording a robust in-
crease. The outlook for 2018 remains optimistic for a majority of contacts across the country. Most Districts reported 
that non-auto retail sales expanded since the last report and that auto sales were mixed. Some retailers highlighted 
that holiday sales were higher than expected. Residential real estate activity remained constrained across the country. 
Most Districts reported little growth in home sales due to limited housing inventory. Nonresidential activity continued to 
experience slight growth. Most manufacturers reported modest growth in overall business conditions. Reports indicated 
that some manufacturers increased capital expenditures over the reporting period. Most reporting Districts noted con-
tinued growth in transportation activity. Loan volumes in many Districts were steady. Among reporting Districts, agricul-
tural conditions were mixed and energy contacts described a slight uptick in activity.   
Employment and Wages 
On balance, employment continued to grow at a modest pace since the previous report. Most Districts cited on-going 
labor market tightness and challenges finding qualified workers across skills and sectors, which, in some instances, 
was described as constraining growth. Several Districts noted elevated demand for manufacturing and construction 
labor. Most Districts said that wages increased at a modest pace. A few Districts observed that firms were raising wag-
es in a broader range of industries and positions since the previous report. Some Districts reported that firms expect 
wages to increase in the months ahead.   
Prices 
Most Districts reported modest to moderate price growth since the last report; exceptions were Chicago, which noted 
that prices increased only slightly while San Francisco noted price inflation was down slightly. Reports of pricing pres-
sures were mixed across the country although several Districts noted increases in manufacturing, construction, or 
transportation input costs. Firms in some Districts noted an ability to increase selling prices. Retailers in some Districts 
reported modest price increases and there were reports of rising home prices across most of the country. Agriculture 
and energy commodity prices were mixed.   
Boston 
Economic activity expanded at a modest pace as 2017 
ended, with the majority of contacts at manufacturing, 
retail, and software and information technology firms 
reporting revenue increases even as some saw flat or 
declining revenue. Employers cited tight labor markets 
as a constraint on expansion. Respondents’ outlooks 
continued to be positive.    
 
New York 
Economic activity continued to expand moderately, while 
labor markets have remained tight. Input prices have 
increased at a somewhat faster pace, while selling prices 
continued to rise modestly. Housing markets and com-
mercial real estate markets have been mixed but gener-
ally steady overall.   
  
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to grow at a modest pace, in 
particular for manufacturing, nonfinancial services, and 
tourism. Nonauto retail sales improved to a modest pace 
as auto sales slipped to a modest decline. The construc-
tion and real estate sectors changed little. On balance, 
employment, wages, and prices continued to grow mod-
estly.   
Cleveland 
The economy continued to expand at a moderate pace. 
Labor markets tightened, with wage pressures coming 
primarily from workers in low- and middle-skills jobs. 
Retailers reported higher-than-expected revenues for the 
early part of the holiday shopping season. Homebuilders 
saw little evidence of a seasonal downturn in the housing 
market.    
Richmond 
The regional economy grew at a moderate pace in re-
cent weeks. Robust growth was reported by trucking and 
tourism firms. Retailers generally reported better-than-
expected holiday sales. Meanwhile, commercial real 
estate activity and commercial lending improved moder-
ately. Labor markets tightened further and wage pres-
sures broadened. Price growth remained modest.   
Atlanta 
Economic activity improved modestly since the previous 
report. The labor market remained tight and wage in-
creases were stable. Non-labor input costs picked up 
slightly. Retailers were optimistic when reporting on 
holiday sales. Home sales were mixed and prices in-
creased modestly. Commercial real estate contacts 
continued to indicate improving demand. Manufacturers 
noted an increase in new orders.    
Chicago 
Economic activity picked up to a moderate pace. Em-
ployment, consumer spending, and manufacturing pro-
duction increased moderately, construction and real 
estate activity rose slightly, and business spending was 
unchanged. Wages increased modestly, prices rose 
slightly, and financial conditions improved some. Crop 
and dairy farmers continued to face challenging condi-
tions.   
St. Louis 
Economic conditions continued to improve at a modest 
pace. In positive news, retailers’ reports of holiday sales 
were generally upbeat, and real estate activity has 
picked up somewhat. However, auto dealers continued 
to report mixed sales results, and agriculture conditions 
in the District remain weak.   
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew moderately. Alt-
hough employment levels dipped, hiring demand ap-
peared to remain strong. District manufacturers indicated 
that a solid 2017 would continue, with upbeat expecta-
tions for the year to come. Holiday retail spending was 
strong, but winter tourism got off to an uneven start. 
Commercial construction increased; homebuilding was 
mixed, but residential sales were up.   
Kansas City 
Economic activity and employment expanded modestly 
in late November and December. Retail sales increased 
sharply, and consumer spending remained well above 
year-ago levels. The manufacturing and energy sectors 
expanded further, and capital spending plans were posi-
tive. A majority of contacts in the services sector report-
ed labor shortages, and strong wage growth was antici-
pated in the months ahead.   
Dallas 
Economic activity grew robustly, a pickup in pace from 
the more moderate expansion seen throughout most of 
2017. The manufacturing sector remained a bright spot, 
although growth accelerated in most other sectors as 
well. Employment growth picked up, and wage and price 
pressures remained elevated. Labor shortages persist-
ed, with several reports that difficulty hiring was imped-
ing growth to some extent.   
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Sales of retail goods picked 
up noticeably, and growth in the consumer and business 
services sectors remained strong. Conditions in the 
manufacturing sector remained solid. Activity in residen-
tial real estate markets remained robust, while conditions 
in the commercial sector were strong. Lending activity 
grew at a modest pace.   

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity expanded modestly in the First District as 2017 came to a close. Most contacted retailers, manufactur-
ers, and software and information technology (IT) services firms saw revenues increase, although a minority reported 
flat to slight declines in revenues or sales from a year earlier. Among responding retailers, online sales performed better 
than in-store sales. Revenue increases among software and IT services firms were strong, ranging from 10 percent to 
20 percent year over year. Commercial and residential real estate markets continued much as in the last report, with 
commercial rents and residential prices increasing in general, while sales were mixed. Labor markets continued to be 
tight and difficulty in hiring workers has constrained expansion for some firms. Few contacts mentioned price changes. 
Most responding firms in the region retained a positive outlook for their business. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts in many sectors cited tight labor markets, but 
only modest wage increases, if any. A local retailer said 
2018 merit raises would be on the order of 2.5 to 3.0 
percent. A restaurant contact said labor shortages con-
tinued to constrain the industry. Only one manufacturing 
contact reported significant increases in employment and 
many said labor markets were very tight. One manufac-
turer was three months behind schedule in trying to hire 
workers for a new plant. Another industrial firm had 20 
unfilled openings in a plant with 100 employees and said 
they were making up for it with significant overtime. 
When asked why they didn’t increase wages to fill the 
openings, the contact said they would have to pay all the 
existing workers more which would be uneconomic. 
Another industrial-firm contact said that when a worker 
leaves, they typically end up paying the replacement 10 
percent more than the departing worker. Software and IT 
services contacts have kept headcount close to flat in 
recent months, though they plan to increase staff by up 
to 10 percent during 2018. These contacts noted that 
shortages for technical roles such as engineers were 
getting worse. 
Prices  
Price movements were somewhat mixed. Retailers 
reported that prices remained steady. Some manufactur-
ers noted input price increases, but most appeared to be 
idiosyncratic (new environmental regulations in China 
limiting supply, for example). Manufacturing firms said  
 
they had some ability to pass through cost increases to 
their customers. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail respondents for this round reported that from mid-
November through early January, year-over-year compa-
rable-store sales remained flat or posted low-to-middle 
single-digit increases. For contacts concluding their fiscal 
year, 2017 comparable-store sales increased by about 
2.5 percent from 2016, though some firms, due to busi-
ness expansion, saw overall sales revenue increase by 
double digits. Sales via online channels have expanded 
faster, and contacts said they planned to invest in infor-
mation technology supporting the growth of data analyt-
ics and e-commerce channels in 2018; some view an 
online presence as an increasingly critical complement 
to their traditional brick-and-mortar stores, even as they 
continue to plan on opening new store locations. The 
outlook for 2018 is generally optimistic.  
A contact in the Massachusetts restaurant industry re-
ported that year-over-year restaurant sales ranged from 
flat to up 2 percent. Net margins have narrowed and 
restaurant contacts said that new business expansion is 
likely to be very subdued in 2018. 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of nine firms contacted this quarter, five reported higher 
sales versus the year-earlier period, two reported flat 
sales and two lower. Of the firms with improved sales, 
most said it was a continuation of recent trends. A manu-
facturer of industrial parts said that sales had finally 
recovered to their 2014 peak; the fall in oil prices that 
started in 2014 had led to a big slowdown in sales to 
extractive industries. To date, most of their recent growth 
comes from replacement parts. A manufacturer of toys 
said that sales in the holiday period were lackluster. The 
weakness was partly due to the fact that there was only 
one blockbuster movie with tie-in potential but, in addi-
tion, the contact cited uncertainty among consumers, 
particularly regarding tax reform. No contacts reported 
major revisions to capital spending plans.  
In general, manufacturing respondents continued to 
have a broadly positive outlook. No contacts expected 
the just-passed tax reform package to have a big effect 
on investment. Two said that tax reform would mainly 
benefit shareholders. One suggested that the reduced 
deductibility of state and local taxes would lead them to 
increase pay in high-tax states to compensate workers. A 
firm that provides support to financial services firms 
expected an increase in demand for tax-related services 
as firms try to manage the changes in the code.  
Software and Information Technology Services 
Tech contacts in the First District are doing well on the 
whole, with strong demand across the board and reve-
nue growth between 10 percent and 21 percent year-
over-year, excepting one enterprise software firm which 
has been struggling of late. Even that firm has a healthy 
outlook. All respondents identified software and technol-
ogy as a strong space to be in, and anticipate growth 
from 5 percent to 20 percent over the foreseeable future. 
Multiple contacts noted particular strength in recent 
cloud and browser-based offerings, as companies con-
tinued to embrace newer technologies. Multiple contacts 
also indicated that the new tax legislation would help 
their business, though only as a one-time boost. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Contacts reported that commercial real estate markets 
ended the year on a relatively high note. Leasing activity 
held roughly steady in recent weeks, with deals proceed-
ing mostly as expected. In the Portland area, office and 
industrial rents increased 10 percent on a year-over-year 
basis, while retail and apartment rents were roughly 
unchanged over the same period. Also in Portland, how-
ever, transactions volume for both leasing and sales was 
down in 2017 as a result of low vacancy rates and low 
sales inventories. In Boston, office rents edged up fur-
ther in recent weeks and significant absorption of office 
space was seen in the Seaport and Back Bay neighbor-
hoods. In Providence, office rents started to increase in 
recent weeks amid an increasingly tight vacancy envi-
ronment. Contacts in all three of these metro areas 
expressed uncertainty concerning the impetus for new 
office and industrial construction in 2018, but nonethe-
less expect some. On the one hand, vacancy rates in 
both of these sectors are low by historical standards and 
rents are on the rise, but on the other hand construction 
costs are described as very high, a fact attributed in part 
to a tight market for construction labor. A Boston-area 
contact noted that some apartment construction projects 
are taking longer to complete than anticipated because 
of worker shortages. Contacts were generally cautiously 
optimistic about 2018. 
Residential Real Estate 
Heading into the end of the year, residential real estate 
markets in the First District showed slight to moderate 
increases in sales and ongoing struggles with inventory. 
(Data for all six states refer to changes from November 
2016 to November 2017, while Boston data were for 
October-to-October changes.) For single family homes, 
closed sales increased in all reporting areas except 
Connecticut. For condos, closed sales increased in all 
areas. As usual, shortage of inventory prevailed and 
contacts expressed concern that short supplies will hurt 
the market in the long run. 
Median sales prices increased across the region, with 
the exceptions of Connecticut for single family homes 
and Vermont for condos. Despite high prices, contacts 
expressed confidence about the residential outlook. 
However, many contacts indicated that new legislation 
passed by Congress could discourage homeownership, 
as shrinking the cap on the mortgage interest deduction 
for primary homes and the loss of most deductions for 
interest on home equity loans will increase costs for 
most property owners.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District continued to grow at a moderate pace in the latest reporting period, and the 
labor market has remained tight. Input prices increased at a slightly faster pace, while selling prices continued to rise 
modestly. Fairly robust growth was reported in most service and distribution industries. Manufacturers reported that 
growth has slowed somewhat from its rapid pace during last summer and fall but remains fairly robust. Manufacturers 
also plan to increase capital spending substantially in 2018. Consumer spending has generally been flat. Housing mar-
kets have been steady overall, with continued weakness at the high end of both the sales and rental markets. Commer-
cial real estate markets were also steady, on balance. Finally, banks reported a decline in loan demand, particularly 
from the household segment, while delinquency rates continued to decline across all loan categories.     
   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has been steady and tight. Employ-
ment agencies generally report that labor market condi-
tions have been strong, though one agency noted that 
the market is hard to gauge this early in the year—
particularly due to the recent snowstorm. Businesses 
across all industries have had increasing trouble finding 
qualified workers, with some retailers struggling to find 
adequate seasonal staff. One large retail chain noted 
that they hired more holiday season workers than in 
2016. 
Business contacts generally indicated that they continue 
to increase staffing levels modestly, though firms in the 
manufacturing and information sectors have scaled back 
hiring. However, hiring plans for the months ahead have 
grown increasingly strong.  
Wages have accelerated modestly, and a growing pro-
portion of firms said they expect to hike wages in the 
months ahead. The minimum wage across New York 
State rose by 7 to 18 percent, varying by location. An 
employment agency contact noted that recent New York 
City legislation restricting employers from asking about 
job candidates’ salary histories may boost salary offers 
overall.        
Prices  
Input prices have accelerated, according to contacts in 
the manufacturing, wholesale, transportation, education 
& health, and leisure & hospitality sectors. In other indus-
tries, however, cost increases have remained subdued. 
Selling prices continued to rise only modestly in most 
industry sectors and even edged down in the transporta-
tion and information sectors. Two exceptions have been 
in manufacturing and wholesale trade, where selling 
prices have picked up noticeably. Retailers mostly report 
that prices have been flat or up modestly, whereas pric-
es for Broadway theater tickets have continued to in-
crease at a roughly 20 percent pace. Looking ahead, the 
only sectors in which businesses planned noticeable 
price hikes were in wholesale trade and leisure & hospi-
tality.     
Consumer Spending 
Retail contacts reported that holiday season sales were 
mixed but steady overall. Retailers in upstate New York 
indicated that customer traffic was brisk, while sales 
were more lackluster. On the other hand, a large retail 
chain reported that sales picked up in December and 
were ahead of plan and up modestly from a year ago. 
The ongoing shift from brick-and-mortar to online sales 
reportedly accelerated this past season. Retailers re-
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
mained mildly optimistic about the outlook. Inventories 
were generally reported to be at satisfactory levels.  
Auto sales in upstate New York were steady to some-
what softer as 2017 drew to a close.  Vehicle inventories 
were said to be in fairly good shape. Dealers continued 
to characterize retail and wholesale credit conditions as 
favorable. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) held steady near a multi-year high in December.     
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Both manufacturers and wholesalers reported that activi-
ty grew at a fairly strong pace, though not as briskly as in 
the prior reporting period. Transportation firms, on the 
other hand, noted that activity picked up noticeably, 
growing at a robust pace. Looking ahead, manufacturers 
continued to express widespread optimism about the 
near-term outlook and plan to substantially ramp up 
capital spending in 2018. Wholesale distributors have 
become increasingly sanguine, while transportation firms 
remained moderately optimistic.       
Services 
Service-sector firms noted continued modest growth. 
Contacts in leisure & hospitality and professional & busi-
ness services continued to report fairly widespread in-
creases in activity, while information industry firms indi-
cated some weakening in activity. Education & health 
service firms noted that activity picked up modestly after 
declining for a number of months.  Service sector busi-
nesses were generally optimistic about the near-term 
outlook—particularly those in business & professional 
services and leisure & hospitality.  
Broadway theaters reported mixed results for December. 
Attendance was down about 7 percent from a year earli-
er, but revenues were up nearly 10 percent, reflecting a 
sizable increase in ticket prices.         
Real Estate and Construction 
The housing market across the District has been mixed 
but, on balance, stable. Real estate contacts in upstate 
New York report that, despite a typical seasonal slowing 
in sales activity, strong demand and tight inventories 
continues to boost prices. In northern New Jersey, sales 
volume has been subdued and prices have been flat to 
up slightly. In the lower Hudson Valley and southwestern 
Connecticut, sales volume has plateaued at a high level; 
selling prices have risen moderately, except at the high 
end of the market, where they have languished. Long 
Island’s market has been somewhat more robust, with 
prices rising and some pickup in activity at the high end 
of the market.  
New York City’s sales market has been softer. Median 
prices of existing condos and co-ops have been flat 
overall—rising at the entry level, where inventories are 
lean, but declining at the high end, where there is a large 
supply.  
New York City’s rental market has continued to soften, 
mainly at the high end. Landlord concessions on higher-
end rentals have remained prevalent, and more recently 
face rents have declined. A major real estate appraiser 
estimated that effective rents are down 5-7 percent from 
a year ago on higher end units but up modestly on small-
er, entry-level apartments. 
In areas around New York City, there has been some 
concern that the new federal tax legislation, which limits 
deductions for mortgage interest and especially property 
and state income taxes, will weaken the housing market, 
especially the high end. However, this is seen as much 
less of a concern in upstate New York.  
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
mostly steady overall. Office availability rates have 
climbed modestly in New York City, remained steady in 
Long Island and Fairfield County, and have edged down 
in northern New Jersey. Asking rents for office space 
have remained essentially flat. The industrial market has 
been more robust: vacancy rates have steadied at very 
low levels, and asking rents have risen briskly.  The retail 
market, in contrast, has softened further, with vacancy 
rates rising, while asking rents have been flat to up 
slightly.      
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
weakening demand for consumer loans, residential 
mortgages, and C&I loans, but no change in demand for 
commercial mortgages. Bankers also reported a de-
crease in refinancing activity. Credit standards were 
tightened somewhat on commercial mortgages but left 
unchanged for other types of loans. Bankers reported 
rising loan spreads for commercial loans and mortgages. 
Finally, bankers reported continued improvement in 
delinquency rates across all loan categories.   ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Nonauto retail sales, tourist activity, manufacturing, and nonfinancial services grew modestly, while new home 
construction and existing home sales appeared to grow slightly. Little change was noted by contacts in nonresidential 
construction and nonresidential leasing markets. Auto sales appeared to have declined modestly. On balance, employ-
ment, wages, and prices continued to grow modestly. Most firms anticipated continued growth over the next six 
months—a somewhat higher percentage than during the prior period. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period, although reports of net 
additions to staff edged lower for both manufacturing and 
nonmanufacturing firms. Average hours worked edged 
lower over the period for manufacturing firms but rose 
among nonmanufacturers.  
On balance, wage growth held steady at a modest pace, 
although the percentage of nonmanufacturing firms 
reporting increases slipped below 40 percent. One man-
ufacturing firm noted that significant annual increases in 
health-care costs precluded the firm’s ability to offer 
wage increases; several other firms cited difficulties with 
rising benefit costs. A few contacts commented on the 
recent news that numerous large firms had announced 
plans to offer bonuses this year and/or to raise their 
minimum wage rates.  
In one of the District’s tighter labor markets, a staffing 
firm reported that wages had risen 4 percent over the 
year, while various firms from that same market noted 
that they were very busy, but the lack of qualified labor 
was constraining their growth. In the Poconos, the tight 
labor market was impacting firms’ ability to fill low-skilled 
jobs and middle management positions.   
Prices  
On balance, price levels continued to rise modestly, 
although most contacts indicated no change in prices 
paid and received.  Across all contacts, the percentage 
of firms reporting increases in prices received for their 
own goods and services was somewhat higher during 
the current period than the prior period. For prices paid, 
the percentage of manufacturing firms reporting increas-
es rose, while the percentage of nonmanufacturing firms 
reporting increases fell.  
Retailers and banking contacts reported few signs of 
inflationary pressure, and builders noted little change to 
the typical price increases for construction materials. 
Overall, existing home prices continued to rise, with 
some variation across markets and price categories. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity continued at a mod-
est pace of growth, with a few signs of slight improve-
ment. The percentage of firms reporting increases in 
new orders rose slightly compared with the prior period 
but changed little for shipments.  
The makers of paper products, chemicals, primary metal 
products, industrial machinery, and electronic equipment 
continued to note gains in new orders and shipments; 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

C-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  
firms in the lumber and fabricated metal sectors reported 
declines in activity.  
A majority of manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
general activity to increase over the next six months. The 
percentage of firms expecting future increases for gen-
eral activity rose above 60 percent. By comparison, the 
percentage of firms expecting increases in future capital 
expenditures and future employment held mostly steady 
at levels just above 40 percent. However, a somewhat 
higher percentage of firms expected decreases in future 
employment compared with the prior period.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales appeared to grow mod-
estly over the holiday season—an improvement over the 
prior period. Contacts reported that sales started flat, but 
growth materialized in the weeks before and after Christ-
mas. The abnormally cold December temperatures lifted 
sales of warm weather apparel, and long lines of last-
minute shoppers were noted at mall jewelry stores.  
Auto dealers reported modest declines overall in year-
over-year sales this period, a further deterioration from 
slight decreases during the prior period. Nevertheless, 
sales remain at high levels. While early reports from 
Pennsylvania dealers suggested a slight increase, later 
reports from New Jersey dealers noted that the cold 
weather dampened sales, which are normally very 
strong in late December due to year-end bonuses. How-
ever, this year dealers felt that “people with cash on 
hand ran to the municipal tax office to prepay property 
taxes, not buy cars.” 
Tourism contacts continued to report modest growth 
overall. A Poconos contact reported that ski resorts were 
sold out on weekends and that visitors exhibited confi-
dence by extending their stays and keeping restaurants 
busy. In November, Atlantic City’s casino revenues 
continued to grow modestly relative to the prior year. 
However, the January 4 bomb cyclone limited activity 
over this period’s final weekend as shore areas dug out 
from heavy snows and skiers in mountain resorts were 
greeted by single-digit temperatures.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms have continued to 
report modest growth in general activity since the prior 
Beige Book period. The percentage of firms reporting a 
higher level of sales has increased since the last period; 
however, the percentage reporting greater orders has 
declined. Expectations about future growth have re-
mained positive, with well over half of the firms anticipat-
ing increased activity, marking little change since the 
prior Beige Book period. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth of overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards)—similar to the prior 
Beige Book period. Loan volumes grew modestly in 
home equity lines and auto loans, while mortgages and 
commercial real estate loans grew slightly. Growth in 
commercial and industrial loan volumes was stronger, 
while the volume of other consumer loans fell.  
The significant seasonal increase in credit card volumes 
anticipated for the recent holiday period did occur and 
was comparable in size to the increase during the same 
period last year.  
Banking contacts described solid ongoing economic 
growth in most parts of the District. Several noted that 
previously hot sectors, including commercial real estate 
and multifamily housing, appear to have plateaued or 
cooled off a bit. Credit quality was portrayed as very 
good; one contact reported telling bank staff to “take a 
picture,” as the bank’s loan portfolio was so sound.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders continued to report slight growth in activity 
during the current period. One builder noted that the 
company’s backlog of sales is off considerably from last 
year and that other local builders are also feeling a slow-
down that began last summer.  
On balance, brokers in Third District housing markets 
continued to report slight growth of existing home sales. 
In most local markets, exceedingly low inventories of 
houses constrain sales and place upward pressure on 
house prices.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts reported no signifi-
cant changes in the high levels of overall construction 
activity. Commercial contractors focused on Philadelphia 
noted that 2017 was a strong year and that activity 
should continue through 2018. New project announce-
ments are needed to extend current activity levels into 
2019. Rising lease rates and new construction of indus-
trial/warehouse space continued to be noted in many 
Third District markets. Essentially, little change was 
noted in the level of leasing activity, although markets 
vary significantly by sector and geography. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District grew at a moderate pace since our last report. Labor markets continued to tight-
en. Challenges in attracting and retaining qualified workers, especially for low-skills jobs, contributed to wage pressures. 
Manufacturers and professional services providers experienced pushback when attempting to increase their selling 
prices. Retailers reported higher-than-expected sales for the early part of the holiday shopping season. Manufacturing 
output grew, albeit at a slow pace. Freight transport and nonfinancial services firms saw moderate to strong gains in 
activity. The housing and commercial real estate markets remained healthy. 
  
Employment and Wages  
District labor markets continued to tighten during the 
survey period. The strongest activity was found in the 
construction and nonfinancial services sectors. After 
softening late in the second quarter, hiring by manufac-
turers has been trending slowly higher. A large majority 
of contacts reported they are replacing departed work-
ers; the share of firms creating new jobs was stable. The 
main labor-related challenge reported was attracting and 
retaining workers for low-skills and, to a lesser extent, 
middle-skills jobs. In response, firms are raising wages 
and creating career paths within these job categories. A 
professional services contact reported boosting wages 
for select low-skills jobs by up to 20 percent, while a fast 
food executive said that wages at her restaurants are 
now up to $11 per hour. Higher labor costs were difficult 
to pass through to customers because of competitive 
markets. Turnover is reportedly much less of an issue in 
high-skills and STEM jobs.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on input costs remained strong, espe-
cially in the construction and nonfinancial services sec-
tors. Building contractors generally attributed higher 
materials prices to rebuilding efforts from last summer’s 
hurricanes. Trucking firms cited rising prices for fuel and 
maintenance products. Price spikes for petrochemical 
products resulting from the hurricanes are beginning to 
moderate. Reports on selling prices were mixed. Building 
contractors, trucking firms, and railroads all reported rate 
increases in response to higher input costs, including 
labor costs, and a desire to widen margins. One con-
struction contractor reported raising rates up to 10 per-
cent during the past two months. A trucking firm cited 
across-the-board rate increases of 6 percent to 12 per-
cent. In contrast, reports indicated a decline in manufac-
turer selling prices on net, mainly because of competitive 
pressures. Professional services firms described their 
billing rates as flat. Some of these firms are feeling pres-
sure from clients to lessen the rate of increase in billing 
rates or to reduce rates overall for the next year or two.  
Consumer Spending 
An improving outlook, on the part of most retailers, con-
tinued into the holiday shopping season. Retail chains 
that invested in technology to enhance customers’ shop-
ping experiences saw improving same-store sales. One 
chain reported that a growing share of online orders are 
for in-store pickup. This model has been good for gener-
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
ating increased in-store sales when the customer comes 
in to pick up an order. Another smaller chain is testing 
same-day delivery options in order to keep up with con-
sumer expectations set by big retail players. A fast food 
chain observed that the average revenue per transaction 
from recently installed self-service kiosks was higher 
than transactions generated by cashiers. Anecdotes 
suggest that revenues for the early part of the holiday 
shopping season are moderately higher when compared 
to those of the same period a year ago, and they are 
also higher than expected. Cold weather across the 
District and the use of promotional discounting are be-
lieved to be contributing to higher revenues. One large 
chain reported that this is the first holiday season for 
which gains from e-commerce are expected to offset 
losses from brick-and-mortar operations. Year-to-date 
unit sales through November of new motor vehicles rose 
3 percent compared to those of a year ago. One dealer 
commented that interest rate changes have not yet 
made an impact on new-car transactions.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing output continued to strengthen, albeit at a 
slow pace. Several contacts cited an improving economy 
as the primary reason for new orders, while others point-
ed to ongoing strength in the construction and motor 
vehicle industries and stability in the energy sector. 
Contacts linked to the petrochemical industry reported a 
residual boost in activity resulting from hurricane-related 
damage. Steel producers saw rising activity, which they 
generally credited to increased manufacturing output. 
One steel producer noted that some of his customers are 
concerned that the domestic economy may be reaching 
the peak of the current business cycle, resulting in a 
dampening in capital investment. Year-to-date production 
through November at District auto assembly plants de-
clined about 20 percent when compared to that of the 
same period a year earlier. The decrease can be attribut-
ed to retooling for a next-generation sport utility vehicle 
and cutbacks in small passenger car production. Con-
tacts reported a pull back on spending for plant expan-
sions and product development after spending rose 
during most of the second half of 2017. Our contacts’ 
outlook calls for a moderate pickup in the pace of growth 
in the near term.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Several homebuilders reported that they have not seen 
the typical seasonal decline in demand. One builder 
attributed this situation to low interest rates, a healthy 
economy, and low inventory of existing homes. Looking 
across the District, unit sales of new and existing single-
family homes during November 2017 were almost 4 
percent higher when compared to unit sales of Novem-
ber 2016. The average sales price rose more than 6 
percent. Homebuilders are concerned about declining lot 
inventory and the availability of land. 
Demand for nonresidential construction services remains 
at a high level. A majority of contacts cited their custom-
ers’ confidence in the economy as the primary driver for 
the strong demand. Property development was broad 
based. We heard reports about a pickup in office con-
struction and owners’ expanding the scope of their pro-
jects. Backlogs increased during the survey period and 
were at high levels. A moderate increase was reported in 
selling prices for office and industrial properties during 
the first nine months of 2017 compared to those of the 
same period in 2016. During the same time frame, re-
ports indicated a decline in the number of apartments 
coming on the market. Apartment rents continued to 
trend moderately higher.  
Financial Services 
Business lending trended up slowly across loan prod-
ucts, and bankers saw higher loan balances on a year-
over-year basis. Increasing confidence in the economy 
was frequently cited for rising credit demand. Merger and 
acquisition financing remains strong. An accounting 
executive said that his firm has performed more acquisi-
tion work during 2017 than in the past five years com-
bined. A large-bank contact reported that although his 
pipeline for loans remains strong, the closure rate is 
relatively weak. He attributed this situation to seasonal 
factors and uncertainty spawned by political activity at 
the federal level. Consumer lending weakened along 
seasonal trends, with several contacts reporting declines 
in credit card balances and drawdowns on HELOCs.  
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Freight volume increased at a moderate to strong pace 
during the period. Demand was broad based but was 
driven especially by demand for steel products and by 
the energy sector. Strong growth in e-commerce was 
also mentioned as driving up volume. Capacity con-
straints and labor shortages were cited as factors con-
tributing to escalating shipping rates. Current freight 
volumes are expected to continue in the near term. 
Professional services firms experienced moderate gains 
in activity. The strongest gains were reported by firms 
that assist customers in applying digital technologies to 
both production and back-office activities. ■ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Since our previous report, the Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate pace. Manufacturing activity picked up 
modestly, overall. Trucking firms continued to report robust growth compared to the prior period, while district ports 
experienced a mild seasonal slowdown, but strong year-over-year increases. Retailers saw a moderate increase in 
sales, with many stores citing better than expected holiday shopping this year. Tourist activity was strong in recent 
weeks, particularly at ski resorts.  Home prices generally rose. Meanwhile, commercial real estate activity increased 
moderately. According to lenders, residential loan demand was flat while commercial loan demand rose moderately. 
Nonfinancial services firms reported moderate revenue growth. Labor demand increased modestly and firms had diffi-
culties finding workers across a broad range of occupations. Wage pressures broadened moderately and many employ-
ers planned to raise starting wages. On balance, prices increased at a modest pace.  
Employment and Wages  
On balance, the demand for labor increased modestly in 
recent weeks, but several firms indicated that hiring was 
constrained by the tight labor market. Some of the most 
hard-to-fill positions were restaurant workers and chefs, 
construction workers and managers, nurses, retail work-
ers, administrative assistants, software engineers, elec-
tricians, and truck drivers. A trucking company said that 
the labor shortage left many trucks sitting idle and was 
putting upward pressure on driver wages. In general, 
wage pressures broadened moderately as more busi-
nesses reported increasing starting wages. Many also 
planned to raise wages for existing employees, particu-
larly for high performers.   
Prices  
Prices grew at a modest pace overall, since our previous 
report. According to our latest surveys, prices paid for 
manufacturing inputs slightly outpaced a modest rise in 
selling prices. Manufacturers of textiles, paper, wood 
products, chemicals, and plastics saw the largest in-
creases in input goods prices. Food manufacturers, on 
the other hand, reported some of the smallest input price 
increases. In the service sector, price growth continued 
at a modest pace. Manufacturers and service sector 
firms expected prices to grow at a slightly faster pace 
over the next six months. Natural gas prices increased 
modestly, in recent weeks, while steam coal prices 
inched up and metallurgical prices rose modestly. 
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased at a modest 
pace, overall. A West Virginia rubber manufacturer said 
that sales picked up in recent weeks after a somewhat 
weak year, and they were optimistic that growth would 
continue in the coming months. Packaging and metal 
manufacturers reported moderate growth while a Virginia 
food company noted a slight uptick in sales. In contrast, 
a North Carolina machinery manufacturer reported one 
of the worst months on record, and a South Carolina 
paper product manufacturer reported a continued decline 
in business. According to our survey, vendor lead times 
increased on average, and many firms reported longer 
delivery times despite higher delivery costs. 
Ports and Transportation 
District ports reported robust year-over-year growth in 
shipping volumes despite a slight seasonal slowdown in 
recent weeks. Ports continued to handle more imports 
than exports, but some expected the gap to narrow in 
coming months. A Maryland port reported increased 
exports to the Middle East, coinciding with the rise of oil 
prices. Trucking companies continued to see robust 
growth in the past several weeks, which was especially 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
noteworthy since they usually see a seasonal downturn 
at the end of the year. Some firms were unable to meet 
rising demand, as they were constrained by lack of truck 
drivers. Trucking companies expressed concerns that 
the newly mandated use of electronic logs could lead to 
an even greater shortage of drivers and lead to more 
mergers and acquisitions in the trucking industry.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
District retailers generally reported moderate sales 
growth since our previous report, with many stores expe-
riencing better-than-expected holiday sales. A Virginia 
hardware store had robust sales growth, particularly for 
power equipment and high-end grills. Meanwhile, a 
furniture store reported strong growth and a slight in-
crease in its profit margin. A high-end women’s clothing 
store noted slightly weaker sales, attributing much of the 
softening to online competition. A North Carolina auto-
dealer saw a surge in sales and a Virginia auto dealer 
reported a rise in sales of parts. 
Fifth District tourism remained strong in recent weeks. A 
West Virginia ski resort was booked to capacity through 
the holidays and is on track for a record breaking sea-
son. Demand for hotel rooms rose across the District, 
although some North Carolina hotels reported slowing 
business and pressure to lower rates due to competition 
from newly built hotels and by-owner rental units. Hotels 
in D.C. and Virginia noted typical seasonal declines in 
rates and occupancy.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate markets improved modestly in the 
past few weeks. Most contacts noted a seasonal slow-
down, although one broker reported “unusually strong 
traffic for December.” Sales prices were generally up and 
inventories were down. In fact, there were numerous 
reports of low inventories inhibiting activity, particularly at 
the more affordable price points. Real estate profession-
als generally indicated that the higher the price level, the 
broader the availability of homes for sale. In some mar-
kets, construction continued at a moderate pace—
including in multifamily—while others reported very 
limited new home construction. 
On the whole, commercial real estate activity picked up 
moderately in recent weeks, with low vacancy rates, 
strong absorption rates, and rising rents, despite the 
usual seasonal slowdown in leasing. However, there 
were some reports of softening activity particularly in 
office and in retail. A broker from Baltimore expects more 
retail store closures in 2018. In contrast, a broker in 
South Carolina said that retail construction was very 
active but office rents were flattening due to minimal 
white collar job creation in his market. He noted, howev-
er, that industrial leasing and construction activity was 
strong, and that speculative building was occurring for 
the first time since 2008. He also stated that multifamily 
construction, while slowing, was still active. Finally, a 
contact from D.C. reported that the skilled-labor shortage 
in construction has been the root of rising costs for a 
while, but the shortage recently started to manifest itself 
in deteriorating work quality and project delays.  
Banking and Finance 
Loan demand grew modestly in recent weeks as gains in 
commercial lending drove the overall increase. Residen-
tial mortgage lending was generally reported as flat to 
down slightly compared to about a month ago, but up 
from a year earlier. Deposits rose moderately, on bal-
ance, in recent weeks. On the commercial side, demand 
picked up moderately. In South Carolina, industrial lend-
ing was the most active. In West Virginia, the demand for 
coal and natural gas operating and expansion loans 
were increasing. Credit quality remained high throughout 
the District. However, credit standards loosened slightly 
as competition for loans led to more concessions on 
lending terms. Interest rates increased slightly, overall. 
Non-Financial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms continued to report moderate 
growth in revenues. The most upbeat reports came from 
professional and business services, administrative and 
support services, and legal services. A law firm in West 
Virginia said they had the best quarter since the reces-
sion. An administrative support firm said that clients were 
willing to pay higher fees for temporary staff, which was 
helping to boost their profits. Utility companies continued 
to report rising demand as temperatures declined. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Coal production was little changed in recent weeks but 
was up considerably compared to the same time last 
year. Exports of coal, particularly to China, were respon-
sible for much of the growth. Meanwhile, natural gas 
drilling and pipeline development work picked up moder-
ately. A hardwood producer reported a modest rise in 
export demand. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts remained largely positive with most noting that economic conditions were improving at a 
modest pace over the reporting period. Most contacts expect continued slow and steady growth in the near-term. Busi-
ness contacts experienced on-going labor market tightness but limited wage growth. Non-labor input costs increased 
slightly from the previous report. Contacts reported that holiday retail sales exceeded expectations, but auto sales sof-
tened. Reports from the hospitality sector were positive, reflecting strong advance bookings. Residential real estate 
brokers and builders noted mixed sales activity for both existing and new homes. Home prices rose and inventory levels 
were described as flat or down. Commercial real estate contacts reported increased demand in nonresidential construc-
tion, especially industrial and warehousing. Manufacturers indicated that new orders picked up since the previous re-
port.    
Employment and Wages  
Job growth across the District returned to a steady pace 
in November, following large hurricane-related losses in 
September. In a survey of business contacts, a little over 
half indicated that they expect their firms to increase 
employment over the next 12 months, while about one-
third responded that they expect employment to remain 
unchanged. The remaining respondents expect some 
staff reductions over the next 12 months. Contacts indi-
cated the most important factor for adding to payrolls 
was an expectation for high sales growth in their busi-
ness while the top constraints to hiring were a desire to 
keep operating costs low and an inability to find workers 
with requisite skills. A number of contacts continued to 
describe challenges filling and retaining highly-skilled/
specialized and low-skilled/entry-level positions. To find 
and retain workers, firms continued to broaden their 
geographical search for candidates and develop or 
expand training programs.   
On balance, contacts noted steady but modest wage 
growth; however, compensation negotiations were more 
prevalent among highly-skilled/specialized workers.    
Prices  
Increases in non-labor input costs were reported as 
mostly modest. Firms reported that pricing power contin-
ued to be limited. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation 
Expectations survey showed that year-over-year unit 
costs were up 1.8 percent in December, and respond-
ents expect unit costs to rise 2.1 percent over the next 
twelve months.      
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retail contacts reported an uptick in sales levels 
since the last report. Merchants noted that early holiday 
sales activity was above expectations. According to 
automobile dealers in the District, however, momentum 
of auto sales slowed compared with year-earlier levels.  
Holiday reports from District travel and hospitality con-
tacts indicated much higher-than-anticipated tourism 
activity. Further, the outlook among contacts remains 
positive for the first quarter of 2018 with strong advance 
bookings in the conference and business travel seg-
ments.   
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from residential real estate contacts in the Dis-
trict signaled modest growth since the previous report. 
The majority of builders reported construction activity 
was slightly up in November compared with one year 
earlier. Brokers indicated that home sales activity was 
flat to slightly down from the year-ago level, yet builders 
said home sales were flat to slightly up over the same 
period. Many brokers reported buyer traffic was flat to 
down; meanwhile, builders said buyer traffic was flat to 
up. Most brokers indicated inventory levels were down 
from one year ago, while builders reported that inventory 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
levels remained unchanged. Builders and brokers contin-
ued to note home price increases in November. Over the 
next three months, residential real estate contacts ex-
pect home sales activity to either hold steady or increase 
slightly relative to the year-ago level, while many builders 
expect the pace of construction activity to remain un-
changed or increase slightly. 
Many commercial real estate contacts from the District 
reported improvements in demand that resulted in rent 
growth, specifically in industrial and warehouse/
distribution properties and to a lesser degree in office 
and multifamily. Contacts cautioned that the rate of 
improvement varies by metropolitan area, submarket, 
and property type. The majority of commercial contrac-
tors indicated that the pace of nonresidential construc-
tion activity had increased from one year ago. Most 
contacts continued to report a healthy pipeline of activity, 
with the majority indicating backlogs greater than or 
similar to the previous year’s level. While the majority of 
reports indicated that the pace of multifamily construction 
matched or exceeded the year-ago level, a growing 
share continued to report that activity was down from 
one year earlier. Commercial construction contacts’ 
outlook for nonresidential and multifamily construction 
activity improved across the District since the last report.     
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts reported increases in overall 
business activity. New orders continued to rise, while 
production levels at District firms remained somewhat 
subdued. Most contacts indicated that hiring activity 
continued to increase at a healthy pace and suggested 
that supplier delivery times were getting somewhat long-
er. Finished inventory levels were reported to have in-
creased slightly and input prices also continued to rise. 
Contacts’ outlook for future production was similar to 
from the previous period, with about half expecting high-
er production levels over the next six months.     
Transportation 
Transportation contacts in the District noted increased 
activity during the reporting period. Ports saw growth in 
volumes across most sectors; however, automobile 
shipments were flat year-over-year. Containerized ex-
ports and imports were up by double digits from year 
earlier levels, and solid growth in lumber, iron and steel 
break bulk cargo was attributed to increased manufactur-
ing and construction activity. Available warehouse ca-
pacity was at record low levels. Year-to-date total rail 
volume was flat compared with last year; intermodal 
traffic was up modestly. Trucking companies experi-
enced a robust peak season due to substantial increases 
in e-commerce volumes, and logistics contacts noted 
greater demand for services due in part to hurricane 
rebuilding efforts and tighter capacity. All District con-
tacts surveyed anticipate continued growth in activity for 
2018.      
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers. Credit union contacts noted strong auto and first 
mortgage lending and increased credit card activity. 
Some banking contacts reported a diminished ability to 
raise deposits.       
Energy  
Contacts indicated that overall, utilities continued to 
move to natural gas power generation. Pipeline take-
away capacity from production to refineries continued to 
be constrained. It was noted that liquid natural gas ex-
ports ticked up slightly with additional liquefaction capac-
ity that came online.     
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Drought conditions expanded in parts of Alabama, Flori-
da, Georgia, Louisiana, and Mississippi and were classi-
fied as abnormally or moderately dry. The District’s 
December cotton production forecast was up over last 
year, mostly because of increased acres, although there 
were some reductions in yields. The December forecast 
for Florida’s orange crops was down from the previous 
report. The USDA designated many counties in Florida 
and Georgia as natural disaster areas due to damages 
and losses attributed to Hurricane Irma. On a year-over-
year basis, prices paid to farmers in November were up 
for rice, oranges, beef, broilers, and eggs and down for 
corn, cotton, and soybeans. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District picked up to a moderate pace in late November and December and 
contacts expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment, consumer spending, and 
manufacturing production increased moderately, construction and real estate activity rose slightly, and business spend-
ing was unchanged. Wages increased modestly, prices rose slightly, and financial conditions improved some. Crop and 
dairy farmers continued to face challenging conditions. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased at a moderate pace over the 
reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue at 
that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Contacts contin-
ued to indicate that the labor market was tight, with 
difficulties filling positions at all skill levels. Hiring was 
focused on professional and technical, production, and 
sales workers. There was a notable increase in the 
number of firms looking to hire professional and tech-
nical workers, and a staffing firm that primarily supplies 
manufacturers with production workers reported an 
increase in billable hours for the first time in many 
months. Wage increases were spread across most 
occupation categories. Wage growth remained modest 
overall, though the number of contacts reporting increas-
es for production workers continued to climb and a num-
ber of manufacturers reported raising their starting wag-
es. In addition, most firms reported higher benefits costs. 
Prices  
Overall, prices increased slightly in late November and 
December. Retail prices were little changed for most 
categories, though one large grocery chain reported 
slight price declines. A number of contacts indicated that 
raw materials prices had risen. 
 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending rose at a moderate pace over the 
reporting period. Growth in non-auto retail sales picked 
up to a moderate pace, as holiday sales outpaced ex-
pectations. One contact indicated that holiday sales were 
the best in many years. Contacts reported gains in the 
electronics, appliances, building supply, tourism, and 
personal service sectors, but declines in the food and 
beverage sector. Growth in e-commerce remained 
strong. New light vehicle sales in the District were flat in 
spite of generous incentives. Used vehicle sales were 
also flat. Dealers expected new light vehicle sales in 
2018 to be about the same as in 2017.   
Business Spending 
Business spending was little changed in late November 
and December. Retail contacts indicated that inventories 
were generally at comfortable levels. While one auto 
dealer noted that, with the pickup in light vehicle sales in 
the final months of the year, inventories had finally re-
turned to a comfortable level, another said that its inven-
tory of crossovers was so low that it may not be able to 
meet demand in January. Manufacturing inventories 
were also generally at comfortable levels, with the ex-
ception of steel service centers, where inventories re-
mained below historical norms. Capital spending was 
little changed, though contacts expected spending to 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
grow at a moderate pace over the next 6 to 12 months. 
Outlays were primarily for replacing industrial and IT 
equipment and for renovating structures. Demand for 
residential, commercial, and industrial energy and for 
transportation services all increased slightly. 
Almost all contacts thought that the Federal tax bill would 
have a positive impact on their firms. Most respondents 
expected to spread the tax savings across outlays for 
capital, labor, debt repayment, and profit distributions to 
owners. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased modestly and contacts expected growth to pick 
up to a moderate pace over the next six to twelve 
months. New building was concentrated in the single 
family segment in suburban locations. Overall, home 
sales remained flat—low inventories in the starter home 
segment restrained sales, while sales of higher-end 
homes moved up. Home prices rose slightly overall, with 
stronger increases in the starter home segment. The 
pace of nonresidential construction was little changed, 
but contacts expected a slight pickup over the coming 
year. Commercial real estate activity increased slightly 
from an already strong level, and contacts expected 
modest gains going forward. One contact noted that 
most lenders are maintaining conservative loan-to-value 
ratio requirements. Commercial vacancy rates de-
creased slightly overall, but more so for office space. 
Commercial rents increased a bit. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing production picked up to a mod-
erate rate in late November and December. Steel pro-
duction increased at a strong pace as imports fell and 
service centers struggled to replenish already low inven-
tories in response to solid end-user demand. One steel 
producer said demand was the strongest it had been in 
10 years. Order books for specialty metals manufactur-
ers increased moderately—growth was spread across a 
wide variety of sectors, with particularly strong demand 
from the oil and gas sector. Manufacturers of construc-
tion materials continued to report slow but steady in-
creases in shipments, in line with the pace of improve-
ment in construction. Auto production was flat. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved slightly over the reporting 
period. Financial market participants noted that volatility 
continued to be low. Business loan volume increased 
slightly, with growth spread across sectors. Contacts 
reported little change in loan quality or lending stand-
ards, though one contact noted that competition for loans 
was strong and that they had lost deals to lenders offer-
ing looser terms and lower rates. Consumer loan volume 
also increased slightly, led by growth in auto loans. 
Consumer loan quality and lending standards were little 
changed. 
Agriculture 
Crop and dairy producers faced further belt-tightening at 
the start of 2018, while cattle and hog producers were in 
relatively better shape, owing to the underlying trends in 
prices received. Soybean prices dipped and corn prices 
rose over the reporting period, but both remained below 
last year’s levels as plentiful stocks kept a lid on prices. 
Looking ahead, lower fertilizer costs and slightly lower 
farmland rents provided limited improvement to crop 
producers’ profit expected margins. Contacts indicated 
that challenging conditions had led to more financing 
requests from crop producers. Dairy producers also 
struggled, and some smaller and less efficient operations 
closed down. Cattle, egg, and hog prices moved higher, 
to the point that producers could earn profits. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from contacts indicate that economic conditions have continued to improve at a modest pace since our previous 
report. Labor market conditions remain tight, the pace of hiring remains slow, while wage growth has been moderate. 
Reports on consumer spending were positive. Residential real estate conditions have improved modestly after a few 
months of sluggish home sales. District bankers reported moderate loan growth across most categories. Unseasonably 
cold weather has negatively impacted the quality of winter wheat in the District. 
 
Employment and Wages  
Anecdotal evidence suggests little change in employ-
ment since the previous report. Contacts continued to 
report difficulties finding experienced or qualified employ-
ees. Construction contacts in Louisville and Little Rock 
reported labor shortages, while manufacturing contacts 
reported difficulties hiring for both skilled and unskilled 
positions. Labor demand in Missouri was particularly 
high in healthcare services, leisure and hospitality, retail, 
and wholesale trade.    
Contacts reported moderate growth in wages since the 
previous report. A contact in Louisville reported increas-
ing starting salaries multiple times a year to attract new 
hires, as well as increasing wages to retain skilled em-
ployees in information technology. Construction and 
manufacturing contacts across the District reported 
increasing wages to attract new employees.      
Prices  
Price pressures have increased moderately since the 
previous report. Residential real estate prices rose mod-
erately, with especially strong growth in northwest Arkan-
sas. Construction materials price pressures increased as 
well. Steel prices rose moderately throughout the Dis-
trict, and a Louisville contact reported an uptick in con-
struction costs. A contact in Arkansas reported solid 
wood products prices increased moderately but saw- 
timber and pulpwood prices were flat or decreased. 
In the energy sector, coal prices were flat. In the agricul-
tural sector, prices generally rose at a moderate pace. 
Corn feed, sorghum, and rice prices increased moder-
ately, soybean prices were flat, and wheat and cornmeal 
prices decreased slightly. Contacts in Memphis reported 
strong increases in cotton prices, and Little Rock con-
tacts reported rapid increases in large egg prices. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate consumer spending has grown modestly 
since our previous report. November real sales tax col-
lections increased in Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, and 
Tennessee relative to a year ago. Consumer confidence 
continued to increase in West Tennessee, as house-
holds indicated their willingness to spend more in the 
next few months relative to a year ago. Reports from 
auto dealers were mixed: While multiple auto dealers 
from Louisville and Little Rock reported improved traffic 
and sales, Memphis auto dealers reported that sales 
have softened the past two months. Auto dealers 
throughout the District hold an optimistic outlook for 
2018. Louisville hoteliers continued to report weaker 
occupancy rates in the fourth quarter.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report. Overall manufacturing activity was 
stronger than one month earlier in both Arkansas and 
Missouri, although the pace of growth slowed in Mis-
souri. Production increased in both states, but at a slow-
er rate than previously. Several companies in the District 
reported new capital expenditure and facility expansion 
plans, including firms that manufacture food and bever-
age products, chemical products, and transportation 
equipment. Sales to auto manufacturers, however, were 
flat to slightly down, according to contacts that supply the 
auto industry. Most manufacturing contacts expect con-
ditions in 2018 to be similar to those in 2017, although a 
contact in the plastic products manufacturing industry 
expects a decline in business in 2018, citing increased 
foreign competition. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector has expanded modestly 
since the previous report. Firms that provide transporta-
tion, logistics, and information technology services an-
nounced plans to increase employment, open new facili-
ties, and renovate existing facilities. Demand for com-
mercial trucking remains elevated because of Hurricane 
Harvey relief efforts, exacerbating a shortage of drivers. 
Reports from healthcare firms remain mixed. One major 
healthcare employer is cutting employees to improve 
operational management, while other healthcare provid-
ers began capital expansions.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has improved moderately 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for November increased sharply from the previous 
month across the District’s four major MSAs. Local con-
tacts continued to report shortages in inventory. 
Residential construction activity was flat. November 
permit activity within District MSAs was unchanged 
relative to the previous month. Local contacts continued 
to report that a shortage of labor is limiting new construc-
tion. 
Commercial construction activity improved slightly. No-
vember nonresidential construction starts increased 
moderately within the District relative to the previous 
month while multifamily permits dropped slightly. Little 
Rock construction contacts reported healthy levels of 
activity that they expect will continue through the first half 
of 2018 at least. 
 
 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the Eighth District have improved 
at a moderate pace since the previous report. District 
banking contacts report that outstanding loan volumes 
expanded by 7 percent relative to year-ago levels, indi-
cating that loan growth, which had been slowing since 
the start of 2017, levelled off in December. Year-over-
year growth in residential mortgage lending continued at 
4 percent for the second consecutive quarter while com-
mercial real estate lending grew by 9 percent. Commer-
cial and industrial credit growth was also strong as loan 
volumes rose by 9 percent compared with 6 percent 
nationwide. Lending activity in open-ended home equity 
loans declined by 1 percent relative to year-ago levels 
and was the only major loan category that experienced 
negative growth.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions declined moderately from 
the previous reporting period. Due to unusually low 
temperatures across much of the District, the percentage 
of winter wheat rated fair or better fell 4 percentage 
points from the middle of November to the end of De-
cember; it is now 89 percent. Contacts are concerned 
that crop conditions worsened further during the first 
week of January, when temperatures plunged.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined slightly 
from October to November, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production falling 2 percent. November production 
was also down by 4 percent from a year ago.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Ninth District economic activity increased moderately overall since the last report. Employment declined slightly, but 
labor demand remained strong. Wage and price pressures were both moderate. The District economy showed growth in 
consumer spending, services, commercial construction, residential real estate, and manufacturing. Residential construc-
tion was mixed, energy and mining activity were steady, and agricultural conditions were stable at low levels.    
Employment and Wages 
Employment declined slightly since the last report, as 
seasonally adjusted November employment fell in 
Minnesota, Montana, and North Dakota compared with 
October. However, labor markets nonetheless appeared 
healthy, with labor demand still quite strong and a 
notable lack of large layoff announcements. A staffing 
agency with offices in Minnesota and Wisconsin noted a 
“continued strong uptick in hiring.” Several large 
Minnesota employers announced expanded seasonal 
hiring during the holidays. A December poll of South 
Dakota retailers found that almost half were hiring 
despite flat sales compared with a year ago; a similar 
share said the labor market was very tight and getting 
tighter. According to a state source, Minneapolis-St. Paul 
had more job openings than at any time since at least 
2001. Limited labor supply also continued to hamper 
hiring. “Every business we talk to, they can’t hire enough 
workers,” said a western Wisconsin banker. A 
transportation company executive said it was failing to 
see growth because it can’t find drivers. A manufacturing 
firm in southeastern Minnesota said it consistently had 
40 openings to fill, and was losing out on available work 
because there were “not [enough] people to take the 
jobs.” A central Minnesota finance company announced 
layoffs of 130 workers, said a local source, and other 
“companies were already discussing hiring the potential 
labor.”  
 
Wages rose moderately since the last report. More than 
half of the respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s annual 
survey of District manufacturers saw wages rise by more 
than 3 percent over the past year, and similar growth 
was expected in the coming year. A transportation union 
in Minneapolis-St. Paul agreed to a three-year contract 
with annual 2.5 percent increases. A transportation 
executive in Montana said wages were rising between 2 
percent and 3 percent. Contacts in rural areas of the 
Dakotas said wage growth was more sluggish. Retailers 
in South Dakota reported wage increases of about 3 
percent in the past year, with slightly lower increases 
expected in the coming year.  
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate since the last report. A 
majority of respondents (55 percent) to the Minneapolis 
Fed’s annual manufacturing survey reported that prices 
charged for their products were unchanged over the past 
year, while slightly more than a third reported increases. 
For the coming year, 44 percent of manufacturers 
surveyed expected to increase their prices, while 57 
percent expected the rate of inflation in the broader 
economy to increase. Retail fuel prices in District states 
as of early January were slightly lower than in the 
previous reporting period. Prices received by farmers for 
wheat, hay, milk, hogs, cattle, chickens, eggs, and 
turkeys increased in November compared with a year 
earlier; prices for corn and soybeans decreased.  
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending showed moderate growth since the 
last report. Many retailers reported strong holiday sales. 
A Minnesota contact said in-state retailers “are mirroring 
the country, or doing slightly better.” In contrast, a survey 
of South Dakota retailers indicated flat holiday sales 
there compared with a year ago. A Minnesota 
department store reported strong in-store traffic during 
the holidays and a 1 percent increase in same-store 
sales in November and December compared with a year 
earlier. Retail expansion continued in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul. An outdoor equipment retailer reopened the first of 
multiple, rebranded stores that were previously closed. 
Warehouse retail firms also opened new locations, and a 
shopping center unveiled a major renovation, which 
included new stores. 
Winter tourism reports suggested an uneven start across 
the District. Good snowpack was reported across much 
of Montana ski country, with reports of early and broader 
trail openings than last year. Snow conditions were 
spottier in eastern District states, especially in northern 
areas used to heavy snow. Bitter cold across much of 
the District to end the year also dampened outdoor 
activity. However, November hotel occupancy rates rose 
in Minnesota, as did revenue per available room. A hotel 
waterpark was reopened under new ownership after a 
$30 million renovation.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
since the last report. Contacts in the accounting and 
financial services sectors reported a year-end rush for 
tax planning services in response to new federal tax 
legislation. Several new retail technology startups have 
opened or relocated to Minneapolis-St. Paul recently. A 
commercial bank was expanding its presence in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul.    
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was up modestly since the last 
report. An industry database showed that nonresidential 
construction spending rose in November over a year 
earlier, but was considerably lower than the previous 
month due to normal seasonal slowdown. Industry 
tracking showed that total active projects as of mid-
December were moderately higher than the same period 
a year earlier. A Minnesota labor construction contact 
said average monthly hours among members reached 
200 hours, up from an average of 170 hours. The 2018 
outlook appeared to be a “continuation of a good 2017 
… not huge, but better than average.”  
 
Residential construction was mixed. On the one hand, 
single-family permit activity in November rose overall 
across the District compared with a year earlier, with 
notable growth in Fargo, N.D., Rapid City, S.D., 
Rochester, Minn., and Minneapolis-St. Paul. However, 
single-family activity was flat or slightly negative in eight 
District metros. On the other hand, the number of 
permitted multifamily units fell considerably in November 
compared with a year earlier, with only La Crosse, Wis., 
Missoula, Mont., and Sioux Falls, S.D., registering 
prominent gains. Limited data (Billings, Mont., 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, and Sioux Falls) suggested a 
similarly mixed pattern in December. Residential real 
estate sales rose moderately since the last report. 
Closed sales in November were up virtually across the 
board; only Missoula saw sales decrease in November 
compared with a year earlier. However, this performance 
follows somewhat volatile, sluggish home sales for much 
of the year due to limited inventory of homes for sale.   
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased since the last 
report. Respondents to the Minneapolis Fed’s annual 
manufacturing survey indicated growth in orders, 
production, investment, and productivity over the past 
year, with expectations for more growth in 2018. An 
index of manufacturing conditions indicated increased 
activity in December compared with a month earlier in 
Minnesota and the Dakotas. A producer of wind turbine 
blades announced that a plant that was scheduled to 
shut down would instead stay open at least through the 
end of this year to accommodate new orders. An 
electronics manufacturer and a producer of aerial lifts 
announced expansions at facilities in Minnesota.    
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were stable at low levels. 
Recent estimates of farm income for District states were 
roughly unchanged from a year ago. Activity in the 
energy and mining sectors was steady since the last 
report. Oil and gas drilling in North Dakota and Montana 
as of late December was unchanged from a month 
earlier, though industry contacts indicated oil production 
was up slightly. District iron ore mines continued to 
operate near full capacity. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity and employment in the Tenth District increased at a modest pace in late November and December, 
and most contacts expected growth in the coming months. Labor shortages were reported by the majority of contacts in 
the services sector, while wages rose modestly across most sectors. Retail sales grew sharply since the previous sur-
vey, but auto sales, restaurant sales, and tourism activity declined moderately. Overall activity and capital spending 
plans within the manufacturing sector rose moderately. Contacts in the transportation and professional and high-tech 
sectors noted growth in sales, while wholesale trade firms reported a sharp decline in overall activity. Real estate activity 
in the District was mixed as the residential sector declined modestly while commercial real estate activity rose slightly. 
Banking contacts reported steady overall loan demand, unchanged loan quality and credit standards, and stable-to-
increasing deposit levels. Activity in the District energy sector increased modestly since the last survey period, and 
expectations for capital spending, especially in exploration and development, were positive. Low crop prices continued 
to weigh on District farm income expectations, and winter wheat production expectations declined further.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment across the District rose modestly in late 
November and December, and employee hours in-
creased slightly. Respondents in the retail trade, whole-
sale trade, transportation, professional services, real 
estate, health services, manufacturing, and energy sec-
tors noted an increase in both employment and employ-
ee hours compared to the previous survey period, while 
contacts in the auto sales, restaurant, and tourism sec-
tors reported a decline. Employment was expected to 
increase over the next six months in all sectors except 
for retail trade which was projected to be flat. Additional-
ly, respondents anticipated an increase in employee 
hours in most sectors. 
The majority of respondents in the services sector re-
ported labor shortages, including shortages for commer-
cial drivers, skilled technicians, and service workers. 
Wages rose modestly in most sectors, and strong wage 
growth was anticipated in the coming months.   
Prices  
Input prices and selling prices were modestly higher in 
most sectors compared to the previous survey period. In 
the retail sector, both input and selling prices increased 
modestly, but at a slower pace than in the prior survey. 
Restaurant contacts reported a slight rise in input prices, 
while selling prices rose moderately. Respondents in the 
transportation sector noted moderate growth in both 
input and selling prices. Prices in the construction sector 
declined modestly for the first time in over two years, but 
were expected to rise moderately in the next few 
months. Manufacturers reported a slight increase in 
prices for finished goods, while raw material costs con-
tinued to edge higher. Manufacturers anticipated moder-
ate increases in both finished goods and raw material 
prices in the coming months.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity grew slightly in late Novem-
ber and December, and was expected to increase mod-
erately in the next few months. Retail sales increased 
sharply compared to the previous survey period, and 
remained well above year-ago levels. Several retailers 
noted an increase in sales for lower-priced and discount-
ed items, while higher-priced products sold poorly. Con-
tacts anticipated retail sales to continue to rise, while 
inventory levels were expected to decrease moderately 
in the coming months. Auto sales fell moderately since 
the previous survey but were above year-ago levels. 
Dealer contacts anticipated a moderate pickup in sales 
in the months ahead, and auto inventories were ex-
pected to remain stable. Restaurant sales also declined 
moderately in late November and December but were 
well above year-ago levels. In addition, restaurant con-
tacts expected a strong pickup in activity heading for-
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
ward. District tourism activity was moderately lower than 
the previous survey period and slightly below year-ago 
levels. However, tourism contacts expected activity to 
increase moderately heading into the winter months.    
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace in 
late November and December, while other business 
activity was mixed. Manufacturers reported sustained 
growth in production, particularly for food, aircraft, and 
electronics products. Shipments, new orders, and order 
backlogs grew at a modest pace since the previous 
survey period, and overall activity was higher than a year 
ago. Manufacturers’ capital spending plans rose moder-
ately, and firms’ expectations for future activity remained 
favorable.   
Outside of manufacturing, transportation firms reported 
strong sales increases and professional and high-tech 
contacts noted moderate sales growth. In contrast, activ-
ity among wholesale trade firms declined sharply. How-
ever, all firms expected a strong improvement in sales in 
the next six months. Professional, high-tech, and trans-
portation firms reported moderate growth in capital 
spending plans, while wholesale trade firms anticipated 
spending to be relatively flat heading forward.  
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity was mixed, with residential 
real estate conditions declining modestly and commer-
cial real estate activity increasing slightly. Residential 
home sales were well below levels from the previous 
survey period and slightly below year-ago levels. Expec-
tations for residential sales were positive in the coming 
months due to abating adverse seasonal factors. Sales 
of low- and medium-priced homes continued to outpace 
sales of higher-priced homes. Residential selling prices 
rose slightly, while inventories fell modestly. Residential 
construction activity was flat as both new home starts 
and construction supply sales remained at similar levels 
to the previous survey period. Activity in the commercial 
real estate sector increased slightly as sales rose mod-
estly, absorption and construction underway edged 
slightly higher, rents and vacancy rates remained flat, 
and completions dropped slightly.    
Banking 
Bankers reported steady overall loan demand during the 
period of late November and December. A majority of 
respondents indicated a stable demand for commercial 
and industrial, commercial real estate, residential real 
estate, agricultural loans and consumer installment 
loans. Most bankers indicated loan quality was un-
changed compared to a year ago. In addition, most 
respondents expected loan quality to remain stable over 
the next six months. Credit standards remained largely 
unchanged in all major loan categories. Overall, bankers 
reported steady-to-increasing deposit levels.   
Energy 
Energy activity increased modestly since the last survey 
period, and expectations remained positive. The number 
of active oil and gas rigs rose slightly, particularly in New 
Mexico and Wyoming. Respondents expected spending 
in all categories to increase in 2018, with the largest 
increases for exploration and development capital 
spending. Firms also expected slightly positive impacts 
in the near term due to tax reform. Abundant supply 
continues to weigh on natural gas prices, but several 
respondents stated that increasing LNG exports could 
help push up prices.  
Agriculture 
Farm income expectations remained weak in most of the 
Tenth District, but the outlook for agricultural commodi-
ties was mixed. Revenues for corn and soybeans are 
expected to be slightly lower than last year due to lower 
prices and yields. Large inventories continued to weigh 
on prices, and District contacts reported lower yields due 
to abnormally dry conditions and wind damage. Produc-
tion expectations for winter wheat declined further since 
the last reporting period due to limited precipitation and 
extremely cold conditions that could cause freeze dam-
age. Lower production expectations, however, supported 
moderately higher prices for winter wheat compared to a 
year ago. In the livestock sector, prices were higher than 
last year for cattle and hogs due to strong demand. 
Despite generally weak agricultural conditions, farmland 
values remained stable due to limited land sales. Howev-
er, some bankers in the District expected more sales and 
declining values in the months ahead.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded at a robust pace over the past six weeks. A broad-based acceleration in 
growth was seen across the manufacturing, retail, nonfinancial services and energy sectors. Home sales continued to 
increase over the reporting period, and loan demand grew. Hiring picked up, and wage and price pressures remained 
elevated. Outlooks improved, although some uncertainty remained, and numerous contacts were optimistic that tax 
reform would provide a tailwind to business growth. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment growth picked up from six weeks 
ago, and upward wage pressure persisted at slightly 
elevated levels. Hiring rose at a markedly faster pace in 
manufacturing and retail, and at a somewhat faster pace 
in the service sector, led by health, transportation, and 
hospitality firms. In the energy sector, hiring slowed 
among exploration and production firms in the fourth 
quarter 2017 but ramped up notably among services 
firms. Labor market tightness continued in most indus-
tries and across a wide range of positions, with several 
contacts saying difficulty finding workers was constrain-
ing growth to some extent. Numerous contacts cited 
rising labor costs, with some noting acceleration over the 
past couple of months. 
Prices 
Pressure on selling prices remained elevated over the 
past six weeks, notably so in manufacturing and retail. A 
pickup to above-average price growth was noted among 
services firms, particularly in finance and transportation, 
although airlines continued to report falling ticket prices 
due to increased competition. Looking ahead, overall 
price expectations increased, with some manufacturers 
and retailers specifically noting plans to increase prices 
in 2018 in response to higher labor and input costs.  
Among energy firms, prices received for services contin-
ued to rise and were increasing at a much faster clip 
than a year ago. Natural gas prices stayed in roughly the 
same range as the prior reporting period, while oil prices 
rose slightly. Energy executives responding to the Dallas 
Fed Energy Survey expect oil prices to be about $59 per 
barrel by year-end 2018, on average, and about $66 per 
barrel longer term (three to five years).  
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector accelerated fur-
ther at yearend 2017. Contacts reported stronger growth 
in both demand and output, particularly among high tech 
and transportation equipment manufacturing. Chemical 
production has also been very robust, and contacts 
along the border continued to see strong maquiladora 
activity. Growth generally moderated among firms close-
ly tied to energy or exports, but a sharp rise in growth in 
the rest of the manufacturing sector more than offset that 
deceleration. Overall capital spending plans increased 
noticeably—half of the 104 firms responding to the De-
cember Texas Manufacturing Outlook Survey expect 
increased capital expenditures six months from now, the 
highest share since 2006. Optimism in firms’ outlooks 
picked up notably, with some manufacturers indicating 
the tax bill may be a tailwind for manufacturing going 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
forward. However, difficulty hiring remains a headwind, 
and uncertainty about NAFTA remains. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales accelerated slightly over the past six weeks. 
The auto industry remained very strong, with a notable 
pickup in auto sales after a lull in the prior reporting 
period. In general, retail sales growth outpaced sales 
growth among wholesalers, and contacts noted a contin-
ued increase in internet sales. A clothing retailer said 
sales in the oil patch markets have stabilized versus last 
year. Along the border, some contacts reported contin-
ued weakness in retail. Outlooks among retailers in 
general remained quite positive. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services activity picked up pace over the 
reporting period, ending 2017 with fairly robust growth. A 
sharp rise in revenue growth among leisure and hospital-
ity firms was a boon to the service sector, while relatively 
slow growth among administrative and support services 
firms was a drag. However, staffing services companies 
reported broad-based demand growth, particularly in the 
manufacturing and health sectors. Contacts in smaller 
tourist areas affected by Hurricane Harvey such as 
Rockport and Port Aransas reported continued struggles 
in rebuilding and retaining business. Cargo volumes 
among transportation services firms generally increased. 
For rail cargo, petroleum and frac sand shipments were 
up over the reporting period, as were shipments of build-
ing products, with recent increases driven largely by 
hurricane reconstruction. Courier cargo volumes were up 
from six weeks ago and year over year. Overall, outlooks 
were more optimistic, although uncertainty remained—
particularly surrounding trade negotiations and govern-
ment regulations. A number of contacts expect the new 
tax bill to boost activity in 2018. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales continued to increase over the past six 
weeks, with sales remaining strong at low- to mid-price 
points. Contacts in Houston noted that sales and traffic 
were returning to a normal pace after Hurricane Harvey, 
and were flat or slightly ahead of last year. Contacts said 
new home sales in Dallas-Fort Worth were somewhat 
better than expected. Homebuilders generally did not 
report concern about the changes in the mortgage inter-
est and property tax deductions in the new tax bill, but 
they did note ongoing pushback from buyers on new 
home pricing. 
Leasing activity in the apartment market was little 
changed since the last report, with rent growth in Fort 
Worth ahead of other major Texas metros. Office de-
mand stayed solid in Dallas, moderated in Austin, and 
remained weak in Houston. The industrial market overall 
was characterized as steady to strong.  
Financial Services 
Demand for loans increased over the reporting period, 
and overall loan volumes rose at a faster pace. Residen-
tial real estate loans picked up markedly, with more than 
40 percent of bankers surveyed noting an increase in 
volumes over the past six weeks. Commercial real estate 
loans also increased at an accelerated clip, while com-
mercial and industrial loan growth held steady at a mod-
est pace. Contacts also noted an increase in consumer 
loan volumes for the first time since February 2017. 
Bankers reported a notable increase in loan pricing and 
a tightening in credit standards and terms. Contacts 
expressed higher levels of optimism about overall busi-
ness activity and total loan demand going forward, with 
nearly two-thirds of bankers expecting stronger loan 
demand six months from now. 
Energy 
Energy activity was up from six weeks ago, as drilling in 
the Permian Basin and Eagle Ford increased and well 
completions continued to grow. Demand for oilfield ser-
vices remained healthy in the Permian Basin, and activi-
ty in the Eagle Ford firmed. Some energy contacts noted 
an increase in lending and investment deals. Outlooks 
for 2018 improved, but remain conservative, with con-
tacts expecting drilling activity, production and employ-
ment to grow this year. 
Agriculture 
The 2017 row crop harvest wrapped up, with generally 
favorable crop conditions after a dry spell in November. 
Texas cotton production was up notably from 2016 due 
to more acres planted and higher yields. Cotton prices 
rose over the past six weeks, and contacts expect the 
relatively strong prices to prompt a shift of more acres 
from grain to cotton this year. Agricultural producers 
remained concerned about revenue, as grain prices 
continued trending at unprofitable levels. Loan demand 
has been decreasing for the last two years while loan 
renewals and extensions have increased, according to 
the Dallas Fed Agricultural Survey. Uncertainty about 
NAFTA is also a headwind for the agriculture sector, as 
many producers rely on export markets to move their 
production. ■  

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-
November through early January. Overall price inflation edged down. Conditions in the labor market continued to tight-
en, and upward wage pressures increased. Sales of retail goods picked up noticeably during the holiday season, and 
growth in consumer and business services remained strong. Conditions in the manufacturing sector remained solid, and 
activity in the agriculture sector improved modestly. Contacts reported that residential real estate market activity re-
mained robust and conditions in the commercial real estate sector were strong. Lending activity grew at a modest pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market continued to tighten, with 
wage pressures increasing as contacts noted shortages 
of qualified labor in various sectors. Widespread reports 
of continued shortages of skilled trade and construction 
workers resulted in a notable increase in wage pressures 
for those occupations. In Eastern Oregon, shortages of 
workers in both agriculture and manufacturing sectors 
pushed up wages significantly. Businesses in the bank-
ing sector reported an increase in the duration of job 
vacancies and continued difficulty finding qualified appli-
cants. Rising labor costs in the District prompted some 
businesses to open new operations in cheaper locales. 
Contacts across the District noted that planned minimum 
wage increases to go into effect in 2018 are likely to 
affect their labor costs at all compensation levels.  
Prices  
Overall price inflation ticked down slightly over the re-
porting period. Contacts reported increasing deflationary 
pressures for generic drug prices partly due to a rise in 
FDA drug approvals. The elevated dollar continued to 
put downward pressure on agricultural commodity pric-
es. Overcapacity in electricity production continued to 
restrain price growth over the reporting period. Contacts 
in the restaurant industry noted only slight upward price 
adjustments. Higher input costs and a strengthening 
global trade environment contributed to a moderate 
increase in scrap and finished steel prices. In the tech-
nology sector, prices for cloud services and tablets con-
tinued to trend downward due to increased competition 
and economies of scale. Prices for potatoes increased 
following the end of the fall harvest. 
Retail Trade and Services 
Growth in retail sales picked up noticeably over the 
reporting period, helped by a solid holiday shopping 
season. E-commerce sales continued to outpace sales 
at traditional brick-and-mortar retailers. However, con-
tacts noted that foot traffic at large shopping centers was 
better than expected during the holiday season. Vehicle 
dealers reported strong in-store traffic and sales, as 
activity rebounded from the previous months. A contact 
noted that online channels continued to disrupt the gro-
cery industry, resulting in overcapacity and soft sales at 
brick-and-mortar stores.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sector 
continued to grow at a strong pace over the reporting 
period. The hotel industry reached peak capacity, having 
experienced steady increases in activity throughout the 
holiday season. Air travel was robust at the close of the 
year, driven by foreign demand. Demand for cloud com-
puting and security software remained strong, supported 
by financial and business services sectors. In Hawaii, 
tourist spending and hotel revenues saw a notable in-
crease in December. Contacts in Eastern Washington 
noted continued expansion of healthcare services in the 
region as the industry consolidates around a few large 
The Beige Book ■ January 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
service providers. Animal boarding and health service 
activity increased as pet owners traveled over the holi-
day season.     
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector remained solid. 
Contacts in Eastern Washington reported energy usage 
by major manufacturers in metals production and aero-
space was consistent with a modest growth in output. 
Production of steel and manufactured metals picked up 
further due in part to a reduction in overseas competi-
tion. However, capacity utilization rates in the steel sec-
tor ended the year below long-run levels. Semiconductor 
production moderated as contacts cited uncertainty over 
government policy.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
On balance, activity in the agriculture sector improved 
modestly. Demand for organically grown crops remained 
strong. Conditions in the swine industry improved over 
the previous year. Farm equipment dealers reported 
higher-than-anticipated year-end demand based in part 
on an improved outlook. Crop yields in Central California 
slipped slightly at year-end, driven by the weak perfor-
mance of certain nuts. The strong dollar continued to 
hold back exports of some agricultural commodities, 
particularly for wheat exports. Contacts noted minimal 
load growth in electricity as efficiency initiatives offset an 
increase in demand by customers.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets continued at a strong 
pace. Construction activity in the residential market 
remained robust, held back only by shortages of land 
and labor. High-end home construction grew faster than 
that of more-affordable units, due largely to narrowing 
profit margins in lower-end markets. Contacts in Oregon 
noted that milder and drier weather helped spur an in-
crease in home sales. Low inventory levels and strong 
demand pushed up house prices and rents in Eastern 
Washington and Idaho. One contact expected that re-
cent changes to the federal tax system could slow mort-
gage lending. Commercial construction continued at a 
strong pace, driven in part by an increase in construction 
of warehouse and distribution centers. Contacts in North-
ern California noted elevated demand for commercial 
office space.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity firmed somewhat over the reporting 
period. While loan demand was relatively unchanged in 
most of the District, contacts in the Mountain West re-
ported continued strong gains. Contacts in California 
reported typical seasonal increases in automotive loans. 
Demand for deposits outpaced supply, pushing up de-
posit rates. Interest margins remained narrow. Contacts 
noted that liquidity was still very strong and overall delin-
quencies remained low. ■ 


