The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
September 6, 2017 
August 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
based on information collected on or before August 28, 2017. The 
information included in the District reports was primarily collected 
before Hurricane Harvey made landfall on the Gulf Coast. However, 
some Districts received preliminary information from business con-
tacts regarding the impact of the storm, which is compiled in a special 
paragraph in the national summary.  
This report summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded at a modest to moderate pace across all twelve Federal Reserve Districts in July and 
August. Consumer spending increased in most Districts, with gains reported for nonauto retail sales and tourism, but 
mixed results for vehicle sales. Capital spending also increased in several Districts. Manufacturing activity expanded 
modestly on balance. That said, reports were mixed regarding auto production, and contacts in many Districts ex-
pressed concerns about a prolonged slowdown in the auto industry. Both residential and commercial construction 
increased slightly overall. Low inventories of homes for sale continued to weigh on residential real estate activity across 
the country, while commercial real estate activity increased slightly. Activity in the energy and natural resources sector 
was generally positive prior to shutdowns arising from Hurricane Harvey. Agricultural conditions were mixed overall, 
with drought conditions reported in multiple Districts. Business and consumer loan demand grew at a modest pace in 
most Districts, with a number of banks reporting rising competition from both other banks and non-bank lenders.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment growth slowed some on balance, ranging from a slight to a modest rate in most Districts. Labor markets 
were widely characterized as tight. There were reports of worker shortages in numerous industries, most notably in 
manufacturing and construction. Firms in the Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis Districts said that they had turned 
down business because they could not find the necessary workers. Many Districts indicated that businesses were 
having difficulty filling openings at all skill levels. In spite of the tight labor market, the majority of Districts reported 
limited wage pressures and modest to moderate wage growth. That said, there were reports from firms in the Dallas 
and San Francisco Districts that labor shortages were pushing up wages.  
Prices 
Prices rose modestly overall across the country. Input and materials costs generally increased, most notably for freight, 
lumber, and steel. In contrast, movements in energy and agricultural commodity prices were mixed. A number of Dis-
tricts indicated that pass-through to downstream prices was limited, with increases in input prices exceeding gains in 
selling prices. Home prices moved up overall, as low inventories put upward pressure on prices in many regions. 
A Special Note on the Impact of Hurricane Harvey 
Hurricane Harvey created broad disruptions to economic activity along the Gulf Coast in the Dallas and Atlanta Dis-
tricts, although it was too soon to gauge the full extent of the impact. Many firms and organizations in the affected 
areas closed due to flooding. A fifth of the oil and natural gas production in the Gulf of Mexico was offline, and many 
onshore producers in the Eagle Ford region temporarily stopped production. Harvey also affected fuel and petrochemi-
cal production, forcing fifteen refineries in the region to shut down temporarily and several others to operate at reduced 
capacity. Some areas experienced gasoline shortages, and supply was expected to remain tight in the Southeastern 
United States because of pipeline disruptions. Contacts in the Richmond District indicated that spot freight prices 
jumped after the storm, as freight was being redirected around the country. The Port of Charleston expected increased 
volumes in coming weeks as freight traffic is routed away from the Port of Houston. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Boston 
Business reports indicated that revenues at most manu-
facturing and retail firms continued to expand modestly 
to moderately. Staffing firms, however, cited revenue 
declines, which they blamed on limited labor supplies. 
Prices were stable and wages were up very little. Resi-
dential real estate markets were constrained by invento-
ries. Respondents continued to cite a positive outlook. 
New York 
Economic growth picked up to a moderate pace in recent 
weeks, and labor markets remained tight. Input prices 
continued to rise moderately, while selling prices were 
flat to up modestly. Housing markets strengthened, 
whereas commercial real estate markets were steady. 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity resumed a modest pace of growth, 
with trends improving for nonauto retail sales, new home 
construction, and nonresidential construction and leas-
ing. Manufacturing growth softened and auto sales de-
clined further. Other sectors continued to grow modestly. 
On balance, employment and wages continued to grow 
modestly, and prices resumed a modest pace of growth.  
Cleveland 
Business activity picked up to a moderate pace during 
the past few weeks. Manufacturers and construction 
contractors saw rising payrolls and wage pressures. 
Higher wages were attributed to growing employee 
turnover. Motor vehicle production trended lower at 
District assembly plants. The trucking industry was con-
cerned about the effect of electronic logging require-
ments on freight capacity. 
Richmond 
The economy continued to expand modestly. Reports on 
consumer spending and real estate and construction 
were not as consistently positive. Manufacturers noted 
stronger new orders, and ports and freight haulers were 
seeing increased volumes. Lending was up slightly while 
nonfinancial services firms saw moderate growth. Labor 
markets improved moderately and prices rose modestly. 
Atlanta 
Economic activity rose modestly since the previous re-
port. Labor markets remained tight but wage growth was 
unchanged. Retailers, excluding auto dealers, noted an 
increase in sales levels. Home sales increased and 
prices continued to rise modestly. Credit remained readi-
ly available for qualified borrowers. 
Chicago 
Growth slowed to a modest pace. Employment, consum-
er spending, business spending, and manufacturing 
production all grew at modest rates, while construction 
and real estate activity increased slightly. Wages and 
prices rose modestly. Conditions were little changed in 
the financial sector and worsened some in the agricultur-
al sector. 
St. Louis 
Economic activity improved at a modest pace. Contacts 
continue to hold a generally optimistic outlook for the 
remainder of 2017. District bankers continued to report 
moderate growth in demand for new loans and a modest 
uptick in delinquency rates. 
Minneapolis 
Economic activity grew modestly. Consumer spending 
was mixed, but tourism was having a good summer 
season. Manufacturing continued on an upward trend, 
and residential construction saw growth that likely would 
have been stronger if not for tight labor, which was hold-
ing back employment in general. Home sales lagged in 
most regions due to low inventories, and drought was 
negatively affecting farmers. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased modest-
ly. Manufacturing and other business services expanded 
at a moderate pace, and energy activity continued to 
increase modestly. Consumer spending was mostly flat, 
with modest growth expected. Agricultural conditions 
weakened, but at a slower pace, and farm income and 
farmland values remained subdued. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately. Activity in the energy 
sector held steady, and contacts expected the rig count 
to stay flat or dip through year-end. Manufacturing output 
strengthened, and growth in retail sales accelerated, in 
part due to a rebound in auto sales. Crop prices were 
generally below breakeven levels. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace. Overall price inflation was flat, while upward wage 
pressures intensified and labor market conditions tight-
ened further. Growth in consumer and business services 
remained strong. Activity in the manufacturing sector 
expanded at a moderate pace. Activity in the residential 
real estate sector remained robust. Lending activity 
expanded modestly. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business contacts indicated that economic activity in the First District expanded modestly to moderately through mid-
summer, with both retailers and manufacturers mostly reporting increases in revenues compared with a year earlier. 
Most staffing firms, by contrast, cited revenue declines attributed to tight labor supply. Commercial real estate markets 
were mixed across the region, with little change in leasing fundamentals and some loosening of commercial sales mar-
kets. Residential real estate markets in the region continued to experience increases in prices and declines in sales. 
Most responding firms cited a positive outlook. 
Employment and Wages  
Despite labor supply falling short of demand in many 
cases, wage pressures continued to be modest. Retail-
ers’ hiring plans were said to be in line with planned 
store expansions and they cited “not much” wage pres-
sure. All nine manufacturing contacts this round indicat-
ed that employment was flat or increasing. All but one of 
the manufacturers who commented on the ability to 
recruit said that they were not having any trouble hiring 
and replacing workers. Two manufacturing respondents 
said they were forgoing cost-of-living increases this year. 
Among staffing firms, all contacts reported high demand 
for labor and tight labor supply. Demand for skilled labor 
has been strong, but contacts said many job applicants 
fall short on requested training; some suggested that 
clients needed to moderate their expectations. Likewise, 
low-skill labor supply has not met demand, with two firms 
citing public assistance as a challenge to recruitment, 
given the low wages in these positions. All responding 
staffing firms reported rising pay rates. 
Prices 
Prices were generally reported to be stable. Retailers 
reported that prices on most items remained steady. 
Restauranteurs said that while there were some small 
price increases on food, some menu prices have gone 
up more, in the 2.5 percent range. Manufacturing con-
tacts mostly reported stable prices, and a manufacturer 
of dairy products said that pricing had been 
“exceptionally stable” in the last two years; a commercial 
aviation contact said they continue to feel strong down-
ward price pressure from big customers despite record 
aircraft sales.  
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts consulted for this round reported that 
their most recent year-over-year comp store sales re-
sults ranged from low single-digit decreases to low single
-digit increases. One contact noted that younger adults 
tend to make more purchases online, leading to fewer in-
store sales, and two contacts attributed recent sales 
increases or decreases in part to changes in customer 
traffic. The outlook for the remainder of 2017 is positive. 
A contact in the Massachusetts restaurant industry re-
ported that restaurant revenues through June were up 
about 3.6 percent from a year earlier. Restaurants in 
tourist areas such as the Berkshires, Cape Cod, and 
Boston’s North Shore have experienced severe staffing 
shortages, especially those that have historically relied 
on seasonal workers needing H2B visas. This labor 
shortage has had a negative effect on revenues in what 
is traditionally the high summer tourist season. There is 
also concern among many Massachusetts restaurant 
owners that the just-signed law “Further Regulating 
Employer Contributions to Health Care” imposes sub-
stantial penalties on employers whose (non-disabled) 
employees obtain health coverage through MassHealth 
(Medicaid, CHIPS) or receive subsidized coverage 
through the state’s health insurance exchange.  
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of the nine manufacturing firms contacted, all reported 
sales in line with their expectations. Sales were up for 
seven respondents, while two reported changes near 
zero. Strong areas included commercial aviation and 
semiconductors. One semiconductor contact reported a 
year-on-year increase in sales in the second quarter in 
excess of 30 percent but cautioned that semiconductors 
are notoriously cyclical. A manufacturer of electrical 
equipment described the last two years as an “industrial 
recession” and said that we are now in a recovery.  
Only one contact reported a major revision to capital 
spending plans. The dairy firm said that capital spending 
was up more than 40 percent last year as they expanded 
alternatives to traditional dairy products such as almond 
milk. A manufacturer of electrical equipment said that 
political pressure had led them to reduce off-shoring to 
Mexico and China and to increase spending on factory 
automation.  
All respondents said the outlook was positive. A manu-
facturer of test equipment said that uncertainty about the 
federal budget and shutdowns was a cause for concern. 
Staffing Services 
Staffing services contacts in New England gave mixed 
reports on current revenue growth, with the majority of 
firms seeing an overall decline year-on-year, which they 
attribute in large part to difficulty recruiting candidates. 
Skilled labor markets, particularly in health care and IT, 
have been strong sources of revenue among contacts, 
buoying businesses more concentrated in these sectors.  
All respondents remained optimistic but said they were 
less optimistic than three months ago. Most anticipate 
only slight improvement in revenue growth from this 
quarter to next.  
Multiple firms cited the current political situation as a 
negative influence on hiring; health care reform was 
singled out as a source of instability, as job applicants 
now seek employer-based coverage as their top job 
benefit. All contacts said they are adapting to the tight-
supply landscape through targeted recruitment including 
an expanded online presence, a better referral process, 
active community engagement, and building stronger 
relationships with job market candidates.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate markets remained somewhat 
mixed across the First District. Contacts reported that 
leasing activity was very slow in both Hartford and Port-
land, modest in Providence, and moderate in Boston. In 
both Portland and Providence, limited inventories in the 
office and industrial sectors were seen as restraints on 
leasing activity. However, a Portland contact noted that 
demand for office space was also soft. Leasing funda-
mentals were mostly flat across the region, with the 
exception that office rents increased modestly in Provi-
dence and rose slightly in Boston.  
Commercial real estate sales fell modestly in Boston and 
Portland and remained light elsewhere in the District. 
Prices for premier office properties in Boston were stable 
despite a modest decline in the number of interested 
buyers. Maine saw an uptick in retail vacancies and retail 
property foreclosures. Throughout most of the District, 
investor demand for industrial properties remained ro-
bust, and banks bid aggressively to lend to industrial 
buyers. At the same time, some banks required more 
equity on loans for construction of new apartments. One 
new hotel project was proposed in the Portland area, 
which reportedly has enjoyed a strong summer tourism 
season. The outlook among contacts was mostly un-
changed, and contacts were cautiously optimistic on 
balance. 
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District contin-
ued recent trends of supply shortages and price increas-
es. For single-family homes, all areas but New Hamp-
shire and Vermont reported moderate decreases in 
closed sales (New Hampshire data refer to changes from 
June 2016 to June 2017; the other areas reported July-to
-July changes). Pending sales generally increased. For 
condos, closed sales were down in Boston, Connecticut 
and Vermont. Persistent upward pressure on prices was 
observed across the region, with median sales prices 
increasing in all states except Vermont for both single-
family homes and condos. 
Low inventory prevails. On a year-over-year basis, all 
reporting areas experienced a sharp decrease in inven-
tory for both single-family homes and condos. A contact 
pointed out that varying rules across cities and towns 
created regulatory difficulties for home builders.  
Contacts expressed concern about the decline in sales, 
noting that as prices increase, potential sellers become 
wary about finding new listings elsewhere and may be 
less likely to list their homes. Nonetheless, some con-
tacts expect the market to become more active with the 
prospect of rising interest rates. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has picked up somewhat since the last report, expanding at a moderate pace, 
and labor markets have remained tight. Input prices continued to rise moderately, while selling prices were flat to up 
modestly. Manufacturers noted a brisk pickup in business activity, while service-sector businesses reported more mod-
erate gains. Consumer spending expanded modestly since the last report, tourism picked up somewhat, and consumer 
confidence has remained close to a cyclical high. Housing markets were somewhat stronger, though sales volume in 
many areas has been restrained by a dearth of homes on the market. Commercial real estate markets were generally 
steady. New residential construction activity has slowed slightly, while commercial construction has been flat. Banks 
reported some tightening in credit standards on commercial mortgages.   
   
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight. One New York City 
employment agency reports further strengthening in the 
labor market, with brisk hiring in the usually slow sum-
mer months. However, a major agency in upstate New 
York and another downstate both characterize the mar-
ket as steady. Businesses across a broad array of indus-
tries have been reporting widespread difficulty finding 
qualified workers—particularly in rural areas.  
Manufacturers reported that hiring activity has been 
subdued and some have scaled back hiring plans for the 
months ahead. Businesses in the transportation and 
information sectors reported some pickup in hiring, while 
those in retail trade and leisure & hospitality noted 
steady to slightly lower employment. Businesses in other 
service industries report little change in staffing levels.  
Overall, wages have risen modestly, though contacts in 
retail, education & health, information, and real estate 
report more widespread wage hikes. One employment 
agency maintains that employers have become more 
negotiable on both compensation and required skill sets.     
Prices  
As in the last report, businesses indicated that input 
prices rose moderately. Businesses in wholesale trade, 
education & health, and leisure & hospitality noted mod-
est growth in selling prices, while those in other sectors 
indicated little change.  
General merchandise retailers reported that prices have 
been steady, on balance, and New York City hotels 
indicated little change in room rates. Broadway theaters, 
on the other hand, continued to report 10-13 percent 
gains in ticket prices from a year earlier.    
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported that sales have been a bit firmer in 
recent weeks. One major chain reports that sales picked 
up and have been running ahead of plan in July and the 
first few weeks of August. Similarly, retailers in upstate 
New York have seen some pickup in both traffic and 
sales in recent weeks. Inventories were generally report-
ed to be in good shape.  
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that sales of 
new vehicles were steady at high levels in July and early 
August and were up from comparable 2016 levels. Vehi-
cle inventory levels have come down somewhat but are 
still higher than desired. Used vehicle sales have been 
steady to up moderately, while prices have softened 
somewhat. Retail and wholesale credit conditions were 
characterized as being in good shape.  
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) has retreated from its multi-year high set during 
the spring but has remained at a high level.   
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has ex-
panded at an increasingly brisk pace since the last re-
port. Contacts in the transportation industry, however, 
continued to report modest growth, while those in whole-
sale trade noted that activity was generally flat. Looking 
ahead, manufacturers remained broadly optimistic about 
the near-term outlook, while those in transportation and 
wholesale trade expressed a more moderate degree of 
optimism.     
Services 
Businesses in most service industries reported some 
pickup in business activity. Contacts in both professional 
& business services and education & health services 
noted modest increases in activity. Service sector busi-
nesses were generally optimistic about the near-term 
outlook, except in the leisure & hospitality industry. 
Broadway theaters reported stronger than usual attend-
ance and revenues for the summer months. In New York 
City, while tourism has picked up somewhat, advance 
bookings for the months ahead have been softer.        
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, a bit stronger. Real estate contacts in 
upstate New York report that low inventories of homes 
on the market have restrained sales activity but have 
driven prices to new highs, with homes often selling for 
above the asking price. Low inventories and rising de-
mand have also started to push home prices up in the 
suburbs around New York City—except at the high end 
of the market, where there remains an excess supply. 
New York City’s condo and co-op market has been 
mixed; home prices have risen at a roughly 5 percent 
annual rate in Brooklyn and Queens but have been flat in 
Manhattan. Here too, an oversupply at the high end has 
kept that segment of the market soft. Sales activity has 
picked up, as sellers have cut prices, especially at the 
high end.  
Rental markets have also been mixed. In New York City, 
effective rents have drifted down—face rents have been 
flat, while landlord concessions have increased. Thus 
far, these rising concessions have kept vacancy rates 
from rising. In northern New Jersey and parts of upstate 
New York, rental markets have been fairly robust, with 
rents rising steadily. 
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
steady, on balance. The market for office space has 
softened a bit in upstate New York and Long Island but 
tightened modestly in New York City. The market for 
industrial space, which had been tightening for quite 
some time, appears to have lost some momentum. Avail-
ability rates were steady near multi-year lows in down-
state New York and northern New Jersey but edged 
down to new lows in upstate New York. Still, industrial 
rents have continued to rise, running 8-10 percent above 
comparable 2016 levels.  
Single-family home construction has been subdued—
except at the high end of the market—while new multi-
family development has slowed. While there continues to 
be a good amount of multifamily construction in progress 
throughout the District, new starts have slowed consider-
ably, except in northern New Jersey. Similarly, new 
commercial development has largely ground to a halt, 
except in northern New Jersey, where new construction 
starts for both office and industrial space remain fairly 
brisk.   
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium sized banks in the District reported that 
loan demand was steady overall but mixed by catego-
ry—weaker demand for consumer loans and residential 
mortgages, no change in demand for commercial mort-
gages, and higher demand for C&I loans. Bankers also 
noted a moderate decrease in refinancing activity. Some 
tightening in credit standards was reported for commer-
cial mortgages, but no change was indicated for other 
loan categories. Contacts reported lower spreads of loan 
rates over cost of funds for residential mortgages and 
C&I loans. Finally, banks reported steady delinquency 
rates across all loan categories.  ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District resumed a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book period 
— a bit stronger than during the prior period — but reports were mixed by sector. Manufacturing, nonfinancial services, 
new home sales, and tourism grew modestly; nonresidential construction and leasing appeared to grow slightly; nonauto 
retail sales and new home construction activity exhibited essentially no growth; and auto sales declined modestly. 
These trends were an improvement over the prior period for nonauto retail sales, new home construction, and nonresi-
dential construction and leasing; they were less positive for manufacturing and more negative for auto sales. On bal-
ance, employment, wages, and prices continued to grow at a modest pace. Overall, firms appear to anticipate continued 
modest growth over the next six months with a somewhat larger percentage of firms expecting growth. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has continued at a modest pace of growth, 
although reports of net additions to staff were somewhat 
less than the prior period for both manufacturing and 
nonmanufacturing firms. Average hours worked also 
dipped over the period for manufacturing firms but held 
steady among nonmanufacturers.  
On balance, wage growth held steady at a modest pace. 
Staffing firms and other contacts generally reported 
steady wage growth and an occasional lack of labor 
availability for specific jobs. In particular, Pennsylvania 
staffing firms continued to note difficulties finding quali-
fied, committed workers, while demand for labor contin-
ued to grow. One staffing firm added to its own staff in 
order to keep pace.  
Prices  
On balance, price levels rose modestly. Although reports 
were mixed, over two-thirds of the contacts responding 
indicated no change at all in prices paid and prices re-
ceived. Prices appeared to hold firmer for raw inputs to 
and intermediate goods from manufacturers, while fewer 
firms reported increases for prices received for their own 
goods sold.  
Retailers and banking contacts generally noted no signs 
of inflation, while homebuilders continued to report high 
lumber costs. Overall, existing home prices continued to 
edge up with some variance across markets and price 
categories. 
Looking ahead one year, firms anticipate a 2.25 percent 
increase in prices received for their own goods and 
services — unchanged from one quarter prior. Firms 
also reported expectations of nearly 2.6 percent annual 
inflation for consumers — a bit higher than last spring.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing firms edged back to a mod-
est pace of growth in general activity after nearly six 
months at a moderate pace. Firms reported somewhat 
slower overall growth of new orders and shipments than 
during the prior period; however, growth rates appeared 
to begin picking up late in the period.  
The makers of paper products, chemicals, fabricated 
metal products, industrial machinery, and electronic 
products continued to note gains in new orders and 
shipments; firms in the lumber and primary metal sectors 
reported declines in activity.  
 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
Generally, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
growth over the next six months. The percentage of firms 
expecting future increases rose for general activity and 
capital expenditures, and held steady for employment.  
Consumer Spending 
As physical stores continued to struggle, nonauto retail 
contacts reported little change in sales, on balance — an 
improvement over the modest declines of the prior peri-
od. In late reports from traditional malls, declining appar-
el sales pulled overall sales negative in June, although 
remaining segments were up. An outlets operator report-
ed a summer resurgence and good back-to-school sales 
through the current Beige Book period. Convenience 
store contacts noted a “tough” July and a weak start to 
August.  
Auto dealers throughout the region reported that the 
slight year-over-year sales declines of the prior period 
had deepened to a modest rate during the current peri-
od, although the level of sales remains high. Prices are 
very competitive and manufacturers are providing signifi-
cant dealer incentives to move inventory. Dealers expect 
manufacturers to back off production next year.  
Tourism held steady at a modest pace, although moun-
tain resorts appeared to make greater gains than the 
shore locations this summer. Strong gains were reported 
from the Poconos and from Amish country, while a Dela-
ware shore contact noted concerns about shorter stays 
and more cautious spending, and Atlantic City’s July 
casino revenues fell relative to July 2016. A Philadelphia 
analyst noted that demand exceeded expectations, 
locally and nationally, and that international tourism 
seems to have held steady.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Service-sector firms continued to report modest growth 
in general activity for the period as a whole, but as with 
manufacturers, reports of sales and shipments began to 
strengthen late in the period. Expectations about future 
growth have increased somewhat since the prior Beige 
Book period and remained positive with nearly 60 per-
cent of the firms anticipating increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth of overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) — a bit faster than the 
slight growth that had occurred during the prior Beige 
Book period. Auto loans and other consumer loans ex-
hibited moderate growth in loan volume. Commercial 
real estate and mortgages grew modestly, while home 
equity loan volumes were essentially flat. Commercial 
and industrial loan volumes declined again. Credit card 
volumes are highly seasonal — they grew at a modest 
rate during this Beige Book period, but at a somewhat 
higher rate in the comparable year-ago period.  
Banking contacts tended to describe economic growth 
as slow and steady. Several noted a small increase in 
shale gas drilling activity; others pointed to gains stem-
ming from renewed global activity. On balance, loan 
portfolios were considered healthy, with low delinquen-
cies and no significant signs of concern.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders generally reported little change in a mar-
ket that has oscillated between slight growth and slight 
decline in activity in recent months. The four weeks 
around Labor Day are typically slow for traffic and con-
tract signings. Production problems continued to include 
labor availability, labor costs, and lumber prices.  
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
continued to report modest growth of existing home 
sales, but no increase of inventories. Several contacts 
noted a pickup of second home purchases in vacation 
areas, but this trend appears modest so far.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts reported slight growth 
in construction activity, which had been flat last period; 
individual markets do vary by sector and geography. 
Leasing activity also appeared to grow slightly, at best. 
One contact reported that the industrial market was 
holding up nicely, but that two spec buildings have taken 
longer to lease up than has been the case recently. 
Contacts also reported that the Philadelphia office mar-
ket was getting tighter, with steady demand being met 
mostly by changing space utilization and shifting loca-
tions within the region’s footprint rather than by new 
office construction. The rental market is shifting in favor 
of landlords. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity grew at a moderate pace in the Fourth District since our last report, an improvement from 
the modest growth seen in the prior period. Labor markets expanded, with wage pressures reported primarily in the 
construction, manufacturing, and energy sectors. Upward pressure on prices paid was prevalent in the construction 
industry. Freight carriers and construction contractors increased billing rates and reported little pushback. Consumer 
spending at brick-and-mortar establishments rose slightly, while new motor vehicle sales strengthened. Manufacturing 
activity grew slightly overall, but production at District motor vehicle assembly plants trended lower. Nonfinancial ser-
vices firms saw moderate gains in activity. Year-to-date residential real estate unit sales stayed above year-ago levels 
and selling prices were higher. Activity in the commercial real estate market remained elevated.  
Employment and Wages  
District payrolls continued to expand, although at a slow-
er pace than in the previous reporting period. Staffing 
increases were notable in the manufacturing and con-
struction sectors. In contrast, energy firms and brick- and
-mortar retailers described payrolls as flat. Several in-
dustrial products manufacturers filled openings that had 
previously been left vacant, or they created new posi-
tions because of rising demand and an improving out-
look for sustained business growth. Construction con-
tractors reported a shortage of experienced labor, mak-
ing it difficult to fill newly created positions. To be in 
compliance with newly enacted electronic logging regula-
tions, freight carriers anticipate adding drivers in order to 
maintain capacity. Wage pressures were felt primarily in 
the construction, manufacturing, and energy sectors in 
response to employee turnover. Mid-year wage increas-
es were widespread in most other industry sectors.  
Prices  
Similar to the previous reporting period, upward pressure 
on prices paid eased somewhat when compared to that 
of the second quarter. Construction contractors saw 
rising prices for lumber, concrete, and wiring products. A 
few manufacturers and upstream oil and gas companies 
cited an upward trend in steel prices. Selling prices for 
products and services were stable on net. Construction   
contractors and freight carriers increased billing rates 
and reported little pushback. Contractors attributed the 
need to increase rates to rising labor and material costs, 
and an increase in demand. Some freight carriers report-
ed that they needed to offset higher labor costs and 
additional equipment purchases associated with elec-
tronic logging requirements. Projections call for an addi-
tional 500,000 off-lease motor vehicles in 2017 com-
pared to the number in 2016. This increase will drive 
down used vehicle prices, a situation which will likely 
have an impact on new vehicle sales. However, OEM 
incentives continue to rise and are reportedly as high as 
15 percent.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending at brick-and-mortar department 
stores rose slightly during the period, whereas revenue 
growth at specialty stores was characterized as flat or 
lower. Contacts reported that revenue gains from online 
shopping have not yet offset declines from brick-and- 
mortar operations. Retailers were satisfied with sales of 
furniture, food, and women’s apparel. Purchases of 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
electronics products remained soft. Year-to-date unit 
sales through July of new motor vehicles increased 
about 3 percent compared to those of a year ago. Auto 
dealers are concerned about above-normal inventories. 
Customers are reportedly waiting for higher OEM incen-
tives.   
Industrial Production 
Overall activity in the manufacturing sector picked up 
slightly during the period. Factors contributing to the 
expansion included strong demand for construction 
materials, rising activity in upstream oil and gas markets, 
and rising exports to China. The latter was attributed to 
strong infrastructure spending in that country. In contrast, 
demand for consumer packaged products and capital 
goods was weaker than expected. Year-to-date produc-
tion through July at District auto assembly plants de-
clined more than 16 percent when compared to that of 
the same period a year earlier. Much of the decline can 
be attributed to retooling for three next-generation vehi-
cles. Even with the decrease in auto production, some 
OEM suppliers reported satisfaction with their order 
books. Allocations of capital monies for plant expansion 
and product development rose. Many of our contacts are 
bullish in their outlook for the economy. However, some 
have tempered their outlook during the past few months, 
citing slowing demand from the transportation sector.  
Reports through July indicated that the number of drilling 
rigs operating in the District increased significantly com-
pared with that of a year ago. Natural gas output remains 
at historic highs. Thermal coal production declined be-
cause of reduced demand from a warmer-than-average 
2016-2017 winter.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Year-to-date unit sales through July of new and existing 
single-family homes increased 1.5 percent compared to 
those of a year earlier. The average sales price rose 
almost 5 percent. A softening in the new-home market 
was attributed to rising list prices. Homebuilders cited a 
shift in buyer preference from homes in the move-up 
price point categories to those in the lower price points. 
One builder described this sudden shift as unusual. 
Slightly higher interest rates were not seen as a deter-
rent for purchasing a house. Although demand has sof-
tened, estimates of single-family construction starts for 
the first half of the year are more than 5 percent higher 
compared to those of a year earlier.   
Nonresidential real estate activity generally remains at 
an elevated level. Building contractors reported strong 
backlogs, though inquiries are beginning to show signs 
of slowing. The highest demand was for commercial 
property development, including office buildings, and 
public infrastructure projects. Office vacancy rates are 
stable, and asking rents are slowly rising. A strong in-
crease was reported in selling prices for office properties 
during the first half of 2017 compared to those of a year 
ago. Reports indicated a slowing in the construction of 
multifamily housing, as lenders and investors are consid-
ering pulling back from commitments to multifamily de-
velopment projects. Apartment rental increases were 
described as moderate to strong. 
Banking 
Reports on commercial lending were more upbeat than 
in recent reporting cycles. Strongest demand was for 
CRE loans. Several bankers noted that customers have 
sufficient confidence in the current business climate to 
self-finance capital projects. Skittishness related to the 
political climate and rising competition from nonbank 
sources were cited as factors holding back more robust 
loan growth. Consumer lending was largely stable. Pur-
chase mortgages were in high demand, while auto lend-
ing softened. Bankers reported generally improving loan 
quality. Loan application standards were little changed 
other than some tightening in auto lending.  
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Freight volume expanded along seasonal trends during 
the past couple of months and was relatively stable 
compared to that of the same period a year ago. Several 
contacts expressed concern about the effects of elec-
tronic logging on trucking capacity.  
Professional and business services firms reported mod-
erate gains in activity during the period. Strongest de-
mand was seen by management consulting and software 
and IT services firms. Factors contributing to strong 
demand for the latter group include clients’ concerns 
about cyber-security and data protection.  ■  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy continued to expand at a modest pace, although reports from some sectors were a little more 
mixed since the last report. Moderate growth in new orders and shipments was noted by manufacturing firms; ports and 
trucking companies reported increased cargo movements. Retail sales were mixed but mostly flat in recent weeks while 
tourism and travel activities were strong. Existing home sales declined slightly while new home sales and construction 
were said to be up modestly. Commercial leasing increased at a slightly slower pace in recent weeks; reports on com-
mercial construction were mixed. Overall loan demand increased slightly as business lending was up modestly while 
residential lending was relatively flat. Services firms indicated that revenues grew moderately. Labor demand strength-
ened moderately and prices increased at a modest pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand continued to strengthen moderately in 
recent weeks. Compared to the previous report, employ-
ment agencies noted slightly lower levels in new job 
openings; however, they anticipated a significant in-
crease during the upcoming fall recruitment months. 
Wage increases remained modest across all sectors, 
and a few firms reported increased wage pressures to 
retain top talent in tight labor markets. Executives report-
ed difficulty finding qualified cybersecurity specialists, 
mechanics, accounting professionals, construction work-
ers, agriculture workers, truck drivers, and customer 
service agents.  
Prices  
Overall, prices rose at a modest pace in recent weeks. 
According to our most recent surveys, services firms 
indicated that prices grew modestly, on balance. Manu-
facturing input prices grew a modest rate and continued 
to outpace final goods price growth. Contacts throughout 
the Fifth District specifically noted increases in prices for 
steel and scrap metal, fuel, and construction inputs, such 
as lumber and dirt. Contracted trucking prices reportedly 
rose moderately as capacity continued to tighten.     
Conversely, an architectural firm noted that increased 
competition over bids was driving fees down slightly. 
Coal and natural gas prices were unchanged or margin-
ally lower. 
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing firms reported moderate 
growth in new orders and shipments in recent weeks. 
Metal manufacturers continued to report improved busi-
ness conditions, and computer and electronic equipment 
firms noted a recent pickup in new orders. Additionally, a 
steel producer commented that business remained very 
strong with order backlogs above normal levels. Expec-
tations were generally optimistic for the next six months, 
as most producers anticipated modest increases in new 
orders.  
Ports and Transportation 
Cargo volumes at District ports remained robust since 
our last report and continued to increase modestly. Most 
ports were seeing growth that was in line with, or better 
than, expectations. However, one executive indicated 
that new services initiated in June had not resulted in the 
increase in activity he had anticipated. Growth in import 
volumes continued to exceed that of exports. Remarks 
from trucking firm executives were unusually consistent 
as they reported moderate increases in shipments, 
broad-based strength in demand, and very steady 
growth beginning around April. One trucking firm execu-
tive suggested that he had “the luxury” of being able to 
turn down business. A regional airport in the District 
reported that air cargo shipments were up significantly 
over the year and there were no signs that this growth 
trend was trailing off. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
On balance, retail sales were flat to up in recent weeks, 
with some variation by segment. A home furnishings 
store reported the largest improvement in sales in the 
past six to seven years, although margins were down 
due to discounting. Clothing sales were flat to slightly up, 
with considerable variability from month to month. Hard-
ware and home improvement stores saw strong sales for 
seasonal outdoor items, but slower growth for smaller-
ticket hardware sales. An auto dealer in coastal South 
Carolina reported that sales had leveled off and that 
inventories continued to build, so he expects manufac-
turers to offer even more incentives in coming months.  
Tourism and recreation activities were strong in recent 
weeks in coastal areas as well as the mountain attrac-
tions in the District. A rafting and outdoor adventures 
business in West Virginia experienced a record July, 
despite double-digit increases in many of their activity 
prices. In contrast, a western Virginia outdoor recreation 
facility reported a dip in July activity, but saw bookings 
picking up at a normal pace for September and October. 
In coastal North Carolina, visitors were up relative to last 
year, despite a power outage in the Outer Banks, and 
restaurants and retailers were busy. Modest growth in 
hotel occupancy was reported in western North Carolina 
as well as Washington, DC, although average daily rates 
were mostly steady.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate agents reported a slight seasonal 
decline in home sales and noted that buyer traffic re-
mained slow in recent weeks. Brokers reported a signifi-
cant increase in first time home buyers, with one firm 
indicating that sixty percent of its sales were to first time 
home buyers. Inventories remained low, and home pric-
es continued to rise modestly. Average days on the 
market remained at low levels; however, some contacts 
noted slight increases due to the seasonal slowdown in 
sales. New home construction and sales improved mod-
estly since the previous report.  
Commercial real estate leasing rose modestly in recent 
weeks, slowing slightly from the previously reported 
pace. Industrial leasing transactions generally declined, 
while retail leasing and sales remained strong. Office 
leasing remained limited; however, a few brokers report-
ed an increase in office building sales. Vacancy rates 
remained low across markets. Rental rates were stable 
to increasing modestly, with reports of rising rate pres-
sure in the industrial market due to lack of inventory. 
Commercial construction accounts were mixed. Realtors 
reported more industrial warehouse construction and 
noted an increase in speculative building, while office 
construction remained limited throughout the District. 
Reports from brokers in Virginia Beach and Columbia, 
South Carolina said there were fewer new multi-family 
developments taking shape and fewer sales in recent 
weeks, while agents throughout North Carolina and in 
Charleston, South Carolina, central Virginia, and the 
District of Columbia said that demand is keeping pace 
with new construction and new space is needed.  
Banking and Finance 
Loan demand grew slightly in recent weeks. Commercial 
real estate and business lending picked up modestly, 
overall, while residential real estate lending was little 
changed. A North Carolina lender said that recent 
branch expansions and a rise in deposits provided addi-
tional capital and allowed them to increase commercial 
and business lending. Interest rates were little changed, 
on balance, as short term rates rose slightly while long 
term rates were flat to somewhat down. Competition 
among banks intensified, particularly in the residential 
mortgage market. A West Virginia lender reported seeing 
secondary market mortgage lenders offering low and no 
down payment mortgage loans in an effort to combat the 
flat demand. Historical credit quality metrics remained 
strong and there were no reports of changes to credit 
standards.    
Non-Financial Services 
According to our most recent survey, services firms 
indicated moderate revenue growth and expected de-
mand to grow further over the next six months. Reports 
from firms in the administrative, education, hospitality, 
telecom, and warehousing services were the most con-
sistently positive. A civil engineering firm in Maryland 
noted an uptick in demand in recent weeks and expected 
it to persist for the remainder of the year. There were 
fewer bidding opportunities reported for government 
contracts, as federal agencies relied more on large, 
single award agreements. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
According to reports from businesses across the Sixth District, economic activity expanded at a modest pace from July 
through mid-August. The outlook among contacts remains optimistic as most expect slow and steady growth over the 
remainder of the year. Businesses reported continued tightness in the labor market, though wage growth remained flat 
for most types of jobs. Firms cited that non-labor input costs remained steady. Reports from most retailers indicated that 
sales increased slightly while auto dealers noted soft sales activity. The hospitality sector continued to experience weak-
ening activity. Residential brokers and builders cited that sales of existing and new homes were flat to slightly up from a 
year ago and home prices continued to rise modestly. Commercial real estate firms reported that demand continued to 
improve and construction increased from a year ago. Manufacturers noted that activity pulled back slightly since the 
previous report. Bankers indicated that credit continued to be available.  
Employment and Wages  
Broadly, business contacts expressed that labor demand 
continued to outweigh supply in fields such as infor-
mation technology, construction, and healthcare. Con-
struction industry contacts reported that the lack of avail-
able labor was still so severe that companies were turn-
ing down business opportunities. The leisure and hospi-
tality industry experienced notable net gains in payrolls 
across the region; however, contacts continued to de-
scribe challenges filling positions during the summer. 
Some employers who rely on immigrant labor—either 
directly or indirectly—continued to express concerns that 
efforts to tighten immigration were having a tangible drag 
on the supply of labor. Turnover was mixed across the 
region; however, any time turnover occurred, firms pur-
sued opportunities to increase operational efficiencies by 
evaluating whether to fold one job into another, replace 
position(s) with technology, and/or shift the salary to-
wards training and development of other employees.  
Firms continued to implement various methods to attract 
and retain top talent, often in lieu of wage increases. 
Contacts shared that in addition to offering flexible work 
hours and locations, more vacation time, and training 
and education opportunities, they were increasingly 
focused on social responsibility initiatives and support 
systems to encourage work-life harmony. Some contacts 
indicated that these non-wage compensation mecha-
nisms were losing their effectiveness, thus broad wage 
increases were expected in the near term. Some firms 
noted increased offerings of early retirement packages in 
an attempt to lower overall compensation costs (replace 
higher-paid, tenured workers with technology or lower-
paid, entry to mid-level workers). Businesses continued 
to report increases in starting wages to attract new hires 
for high-skill positions, but most contacts indicated that 
these increases remained in the two to three percent 
range.    
Prices  
Non-labor input costs were stable and businesses re-
ported that pricing power remained constrained. Accord-
ing to the Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations 
survey, respondents indicated that year-over-year unit 
costs were up 1.7 percent in August and they expect unit 
costs to rise 1.9 percent over the next twelve months.   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retail contacts reported that sales levels were 
higher than expected in July. Retailers noted that back to 
school shopping and online sales helped boost overall 
sales levels this period. Automotive dealers continued to 
report a slowdown in the momentum of auto sales from a 
year ago. 
In general, tourism and hospitality contacts in the District 
reported that activity over the summer season was softer 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
than expected, which they attributed to significant rainfall 
throughout the region. In most markets, hotel occupancy 
achieved expectations; however, average daily rates 
remained subdued. Many contacts noted that the outlook 
for the remainder of the year should be in line or slightly 
below forecasts made earlier in the year.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from District residential real estate contacts in 
July signaled modest but continued growth. Builder 
reports on construction activity were mixed. Brokers and 
builders continued to report that home sales were flat to 
slightly up relative to one year earlier. The majority of 
contacts noted that buyer traffic was flat to slightly up 
and inventory levels were down from the year-ago level. 
Both builders and brokers continued to report modest 
gains in home prices. Home sales expectations re-
mained positive in July, with most brokers and builders 
anticipating that sales would hold steady or increase 
slightly over the next three months compared to the year
-earlier level. Most builders continued to expect that 
construction activity would match or exceed the current 
pace over the next three months. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts reported 
improvements in demand that resulted in rent growth, 
but they cautioned that the rate of improvement varied 
by metropolitan area, submarket, and property type. The 
majority of commercial contractors indicated that the 
pace of nonresidential construction activity had in-
creased from one year ago, but a growing share noted 
that activity was down slightly. Most contacts reported 
healthy backlogs. While several reports indicated that 
the pace of multifamily construction matched or exceed-
ed the year-ago level, some continued to report that 
activity was down from one year earlier. Looking forward, 
District commercial construction contacts’ expectations 
for the pace of nonresidential construction over the third 
quarter was mixed, while their outlook for the pace of 
multifamily construction continued to level off.    
Manufacturing 
District manufacturers indicated that overall activity 
expanded, but at a slower pace since the last reporting 
period. While overall manufacturing activity expanded, 
contacts reported slower growth in new orders amid 
modest gains in production and more tepid job gains. 
Supply delivery times were reported to be getting short-
er, while finished inventory levels decreased. Contacts’ 
outlook for production was relatively unchanged from the 
previous report, with about half expecting higher produc-
tion levels over the next six months.   
Transportation 
Reports from District transportation contacts were little 
changed since the previous report. Ports continued to 
indicate strong growth in containerized, bulk, and break-
bulk cargo. Total rail traffic remained flat. The declines in 
shipments of grain, petroleum and petroleum products, 
and metallic ores, were mostly offset by increases in 
nonmetallic minerals, crushed stone, sand and gravel, 
and coal. Year-to-date intermodal traffic, however, was 
up modestly. Logistics and freight forwarding contacts 
cited further growth in e-commerce shipments.    
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers. Some contacts reported mortgage activity 
slowed due to a limited supply of homes for sale and a 
decline in auto lending due to decreasing demand. Com-
mercial loan activity was brisk and small businesses 
used loan proceeds to refinance or expand their busi-
ness.    
Energy  
Contacts indicated that liquefied natural gas exports, on 
average, continued to increase from the Gulf Coast. 
Reports from energy contacts noted that completion of 
pipeline projects continued to add growth in capacity to 
the Gulf Coast. Utility contacts indicated residential 
usage continued to decline while overall commercial and 
industrial usage increased slightly.   
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Significant rainfall throughout much of the District elimi-
nated drought conditions but resulted in many areas 
experiencing abnormally moist to excessively wet condi-
tions. These heavy or frequent rains caused some crop 
damage and delayed planting and harvesting in parts of 
the District. Forecasts still indicate that the District will 
exceed last year’s production in cotton, soybeans, and 
peanuts, but lower rice and corn production is expected. 
With harvesting completed for the current season, Flori-
da’s orange production forecast was significantly lower 
than last year’s production. On a year-over-year basis, 
prices paid to farmers in June were up for cotton, beef, 
broilers, and eggs but were down for corn, rice, and 
soybeans. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District slowed to a modest pace in July and early August, and contacts 
expected growth to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment, consumer spending, business 
spending, and manufacturing production all grew at modest rates, while construction and real estate activity increased 
slightly. Wages and prices rose modestly. Conditions were little changed in the financial sector and worsened some in 
the agricultural sector. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth slowed to a modest rate over the 
reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue at 
that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Contacts indicat-
ed that the labor market was tight and reported difficulty 
filling positions at all skill levels. Hiring was primarily 
focused on professional and technical, sales, and pro-
duction workers, though there was an increase in the 
number of contacts hiring management and administra-
tive workers. A staffing firm that supplies firms with IT 
workers said growth was strong, while a staffing firm that 
primarily supplies manufacturers with production workers 
reported a slight decline in billable hours. Wage growth 
was modest overall, with wage increases more likely for 
high-skilled occupations. Many contacts said that the 
cost of health insurance had increased. 
Prices  
Overall, prices again rose modestly in July and early 
August. Retail prices increased slightly, with the excep-
tion of grocery prices, which were flat after a period of 
steady declines. There were multiple reports of rising 
prices for older used cars. Many manufacturers noted an 
increase in raw materials costs. One manufacturing 
contact indicated that persistent rail delivery delays were 
forcing them to use more costly modes of transportation. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Non-auto retail sales rose slightly, led by 
improvements in the furniture, building materials, food 
and beverage, and health and personal care segments. 
Grocery store sales were little changed overall, though 
contacts reported that there was growth in delivery and 
pickup services. Auto dealers across the District reported 
a moderate increase in sales. The vehicle mix continued 
to shift from cars to light trucks, led by increased sales of 
crossover vehicles. The pace of used vehicle sales was 
up modestly on balance. 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending slowed to a modest pace in 
July and early August. Retail inventories were slightly 
higher than desired. Manufacturing inventories were at 
comfortable levels overall, though a surge in steel im-
ports led to elevated inventories at service centers. 
Growth in capital spending slowed to a modest pace, 
and contacts expected growth to continue at that pace 
for the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were primarily for 
replacing industrial equipment, IT equipment, and reno-
vating structures, though there was an increase in the 
number of contacts reporting spending for expansion. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased slightly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased modestly, with growth concentrated in the single
-family segment and suburban locations. Home sales 
increased modestly overall, with contacts across the 
District indicating that low inventories of single-family 
starter homes were holding back growth. Growth varied 
by price point, with a slowdown in sales of homes under 
$250,000 and a pickup in sales of homes over $250,000. 
Growth also varied by location, with reports of a moder-
ate increase in the Chicago area and a slight slowdown 
in the Detroit area. Home prices were up slightly overall. 
Nonresidential construction was little changed, though 
one contact noted decreasing demand from automotive 
suppliers for building new manufacturing facilities. Com-
mercial real estate activity remained strong, edging up 
further on balance over the reporting period. Commercial 
vacancy rates declined slightly and both commercial 
rents and the availability of sublease space changed 
little. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production growth slowed to a modest 
pace in July and early August. Steel production grew 
modestly (with increases in both domestic and interna-
tional demand), and heavy machinery picked up some 
as well, with contacts from both sectors reporting in-
creased demand from the energy sector. Sales for spe-
cialty metals manufacturers increased a bit, with con-
tacts highlighting growth in the energy, aerospace, and 
defense sectors. Manufacturers of construction materials 
reported slow but steady growth in line with the pace of 
improvement in the construction sector. Demand for 
heavy trucks increased moderately, while demand for 
autos declined slightly.  
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Financial market participants noted 
that equity prices remain high and volatility remains low. 
Business loan demand slowed some, particularly from 
middle-market firms. The slowdown led to reports of 
increased competition between banks for customers and 
greater pressure on loan pricing and terms. In spite of 
lower volumes overall, contacts reported increased 
demand for capital equipment loans. Consumer loan 
demand increased slightly on balance. Demand for 
home and auto loans increased slightly and quality for 
both was little changed.  
Agriculture 
A lack of rainfall in July and early August hurt crops in 
much of Iowa and parts of Illinois and Indiana. Crop 
conditions and maturity lagged that of last year’s bumper 
crop, to the point that contacts expected the corn harvest 
to be below trend and the soybean harvest to be at 
about trend. Corn and wheat prices fell, while soybean 
prices were flat. Given current prices, some operations 
will be able to make crop insurance claims and take 
advantage of government support programs. Dairy pric-
es moved higher, reportedly easing losses for dairy 
operations. Hog and cattle prices were down, but prices 
were still high enough for many operations to be able to 
turn a profit. In addition, contacts expected that the 
opening of a pork processing plant in Michigan would 
lead to greater demand for hogs in the region. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have improved at a modest pace since our previous report. District labor market conditions contin-
ue to improve, although employment growth has leveled in recent months as contacts report difficulties filling open 
positions. Price pressures remain modest, although fewer contacts reported increasing prices charged to customers in 
recent months. In general, business contacts surveyed in mid-August continued to hold an optimistic outlook for growth 
during the remainder of 2017. On net, 53 percent of contacts expect District economic conditions in 2017 to be better or 
somewhat better than last year. This outlook was generally unchanged since contacts were surveyed in mid-May.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased modestly since the previous 
report. Of the business contacts surveyed in mid-August, 
on net, 29 percent reported that third-quarter employ-
ment was higher or slightly higher than a year ago. Con-
tacts in a variety of industries continued to report difficul-
ties finding skilled or qualified employees. Construction 
contacts across the District reported shortages of both 
skilled and unskilled workers. In addition, manufacturing 
contacts in Louisville noted that difficulties in finding 
qualified labor have led to longer lead times and an 
inability to fill additional orders.  
Contacts reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report, as tightness in the labor market has 
resulted in upward pressure on wages. On net, 61 per-
cent of contacts reported wages were higher or slightly 
higher than a year ago, and a similar share reported 
increases in labor costs.  
Prices  
Price pressures have increased modestly since our 
previous report. Business contacts surveyed reported 
that prices charged to consumers and non-labor input 
costs increased modestly. On net, 22 percent of contacts 
reported that prices were higher than a year ago and 35 
percent reported that non-labor input costs were higher 
than a year ago. Although prices continue to move up-
ward, growth has slowed during the third quarter.  
Reports on construction costs were mixed. Contacts in 
St. Louis and Louisville noted rising construction costs; 
however, several Little Rock contacts reported declines 
in construction costs. In particular, multiple contacts in 
the wood products sector in Arkansas reported that 
excess supply continues to drive down input prices.  
Commodity price pressures have been mixed. Since the 
previous report, coal prices in Illinois, Indiana, and Ken-
tucky have been flat. In the agricultural sector, corn 
prices increased modestly, while sorghum prices are 
unchanged. In Little Rock, cash prices of rice increased 
moderately. A Little Rock contact reported that soybean 
and wheat prices also increased. Prices of cottonseed in 
Memphis fell slightly, and soybean and wheat prices in 
St. Louis decreased moderately. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers portray a mixed picture of consumer spending activi-
ty. Although July real sales tax collections increased in 
Arkansas relative to a year ago, they declined in Ken-
tucky, Missouri and Tennessee. Multiple auto dealers 
across the District reported a decrease in sales, which 
have failed to meet their expectations during 2017. St. 
Louis dealers indicated a shift in demand toward low-end 
vehicles. 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Hospitality contacts in Missouri reported that business 
activity has increased since our previous report, whereas 
hoteliers in Kentucky and Arkansas indicated a decline in 
hotel occupancy rates. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report, although the pace of growth slowed 
across the District. On net, about one-third of contacts 
reported that production, new orders, and capacity utili-
zation increased in the third quarter relative to one year 
ago. The results are down from our previous survey, 
when more than half of contacts reported improvements 
in these areas. More contacts reported increases in 
capital expenditures than in the previous survey. Several 
companies reported new capital expenditure and facility 
expansion plans, including firms that manufacture food 
products, transportation equipment, and metal products. 
Contacts are less optimistic about the next quarter than 
in our previous report, with fewer than half expecting 
improvements, down from two-thirds last quarter. Some 
contacts expressed concerns about political uncertainty 
and a slowdown in the auto industry.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports of plans in the service sector have been positive 
since the previous report. More than two-thirds of trans-
portation and service contacts reported that sales met or 
exceeded expectations in the current quarter. More than 
half of contacts reported higher dollar sales in the current 
quarter than this time last year, and slightly less than half 
expect sales to be higher in the next quarter than they 
were last year. Firms that provide transportation and 
information technology services reported plans to ex-
pand facilities and hire employees, particularly in the St. 
Louis region. Reports from healthcare firms remain 
mixed, but are more positive than earlier this year.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales activity has been mixed 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for July ticked up slightly from the previous month 
in the District’s four major MSAs. Year-to-date sales 
were generally in line with those from a year ago. Local 
real estate contacts continued to report that significant 
shortages in inventory have hindered sales, and, on net, 
nearly 40 percent of survey respondents indicated that 
sales fell short of expectations halfway through the third 
quarter. One industry contact noted that mortgage rates 
have been lower than expected, providing a positive 
impact on business.  
Residential construction activity has been flat since the 
previous report. July permit activity dropped slightly 
relative to the previous month. However, most contacts 
reported an increase in residential construction com-
pared with a year ago. Expectations are slightly less 
optimistic for the fourth quarter. 
Commercial real estate activity has improved modestly 
since the previous report. Contacts reported relatively 
strong demand for most property types, particularly office 
and industrial. However, contacts indicated a decrease 
in multifamily demand relative to a year ago. 
Commercial construction activity remained strong. Multi-
ple contacts reported an optimistic outlook for the rest of 
2017. Planning and development of new hotels contin-
ued throughout the District, particularly in Louisville and 
Memphis. Multifamily construction activity also remained 
robust.  
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the Eight District have improved at 
a modest pace since the previous report. Loan demand 
rose at a moderate rate with continued signs of slight 
tapering. District contacts reported that commercial and 
industrial loan demand grew moderately relative to year-
ago levels, while year-over-year auto loan demand expe-
rienced an unexpected and sharp decline. Delinquencies 
rose modestly across all loan categories and are ex-
pected to continue rise next quarter. Contacts reported 
that competition from other banks and credit unions has 
increased moderately, while competition from non-bank 
financial service providers has remained generally un-
changed. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were mixed in this report-
ing period. The conditions of the District’s cotton and rice 
crops have improved since our previous report and are 
better than the same time last year. Although rice condi-
tions have improved, early-season flooding pushed 
acreage down 25 percent from last year. The lost acre-
age will hurt rice farmers this year, but some of these 
farmers are optimistic that a recent trade agreement with 
China will boost profits. Meanwhile, corn and soybean 
conditions declined from the previous period.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined slightly 
from June to July, with seasonally adjusted coal produc-
tion declining 3 percent. However, July production was 
10 percent above a year earlier.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew modestly, despite tight labor 
conditions. Wage pressure was moderate, while price pressure was modest overall. The District economy showed 
growth in services, real estate, manufacturing, residential construction, tourism, and energy. But consumer spending 
and commercial construction were mixed, and agriculture remained weak.   
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew modestly since the last report, despite 
continued tight labor conditions. Seasonally adjusted 
employment in July grew in a majority of District states; 
Minnesota added 7,700 jobs, and June job growth was 
also revised significantly higher. But South Dakota and 
Montana saw total employment dip slightly in July, due at 
least in part to constrained labor supply. Montana 
workforce development offices saw one-third fewer 
active job seekers in July compared with a year earlier. 
District-wide, initial unemployment claims dropped by 14 
percent over the most recent six-week period compared 
with a year earlier, and continuing claims dropped 12 
percent; every District state saw significant declines in 
both categories. In Mankato, Minn., labor is “the number 
one concern,” according to a business source. A 
Minneapolis-St. Paul staffing firm said that “lots of needs 
go unfulfilled” and business was being turned away 
because of tight labor. Labor retention continued to be a 
problem. A South Dakota human resources consultant 
said most businesses were hiring, but more often “to 
replace turnover and retirements than to increase 
headcount.” An ad hoc poll of ag bankers in 
southwestern Minnesota found that 60 percent were 
hiring, but the large majority were doing so because of 
labor turnover; 90 percent said they were having 
difficulty finding qualified labor.  
Wages grew moderately since the last report. A South 
Dakota contact said there was pressure to boost wages 
and companies “seem to be willing to pay a bit more” for 
talent. A staffing contact said that the recently passed 
$15-per-hour minimum wage in Minneapolis—being 
implemented over five years—was rippling across wage 
expectations of workers earning below or near that level. 
Some wage sentiment was softer, however. The 
aforementioned poll of ag bankers found that two-thirds 
believed 2017 wage increases would be between 1 and 
3 percent. A Minnesota construction company said that 
office personnel wages “had very modest increases this 
year for some, and none for others.”   
Prices  
Price pressure remained modest since the last report. 
Retail fuel prices in District states increased slightly. A 
commercial contractor reported that construction 
materials prices were steady, but he was budgeting for a 
2 percent increase in construction costs largely due to 
labor costs. Rental rates for apartments in Minneapolis-
St. Paul have increased 4 to 5 percent over the last 12 
months, according to industry sources, while increases 
in other commercial segments have been more modest, 
especially of late. Prices received by farmers for wheat, 
hay, milk, hogs, cattle, chickens, and eggs increased in 
June compared with a year earlier; prices for corn, 
soybeans, and turkeys decreased.  
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending was mixed since the last report. The 
most current data on statewide gross retail sales showed 
a decline in recent summer months in South Dakota and 
Wisconsin compared with a year earlier; however, sales 
tax revenue in North Dakota increased in July. While 
store closures grabbed headlines, retail expansions were 
also seen in many metro markets in the District. A mall 
manager in Minnesota reported that business was “good 
overall,” despite the loss of an anchor tenant. 
Summer tourism has been generally positive. South 
Dakota’s annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally saw an uptick 
in attendance of almost 5 percent over last year. Most 
regional and state fairs have seen increased attendance. 
Glacier National Park summer visits were up 25 percent 
over last year’s record attendance. But attendance at 
other District national parks was spotty. Minnesota hotel 
occupancy rates in July were strong overall compared 
with a year earlier, but some weakness was seen in St. 
Cloud and northern Minnesota.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. Providers of data 
analytics for agriculture reported a jump in demand this 
year as farmers sought to control input costs through 
more precise application of fertilizer and chemicals. A 
Minnesota accounting and professional services firm 
said it was seeing “pretty significant growth” among 
clients looking for one-stop services. A provider of tele-
health services reported that demand was increasing 
from rural areas.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction was mixed since the last report. Industry 
data suggested that spending has slowed for commercial 
and heavy construction in the District compared with a 
year ago. A southern Minnesota contractor said the 
company’s commercial construction volume was down 
one-quarter from last year due to delays for several 
projects. However, commercial permits in July— 
suggestive of future activity—were higher in a majority of 
the District’s larger cities, with the notable exception of 
Minneapolis. Residential building, on the other hand, 
saw modest but widespread growth since the last report. 
Increases in the number of permitted, single-family 
homes in July were seen in a majority of larger cities, 
while the Minneapolis-St. Paul region was flat but saw 
strong multifamily permitting. Labor shortages were 
reportedly holding back more construction. A Minnesota 
developer said his company could have built 40 to 45 
homes this year, but was on track to build just 32 due to 
a lack of available labor.  
Commercial real estate grew modestly since the last 
report. Industrial vacancy rates were at very low levels in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul, though rental rates were flat. 
Office vacancy rates were flat to slightly lower. Despite 
continued strong multifamily construction, vacancy rates 
in Minneapolis-St. Paul and Missoula, Mont. remained 
low. Residential real estate sales slowed in July 
compared with a year earlier. Though increases were 
seen in a few markets (northern Wisconsin; Missoula 
and Bozeman, Mont.), most markets saw declines, 
including a 5 percent drop across Minnesota, which was 
widely attributed to low inventory.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An index of manufacturing 
conditions indicated increased activity in July compared 
with a month earlier in Minnesota and the Dakotas. An 
annual survey of Montana manufacturers indicated a 
positive outlook among respondents for production, 
sales, profits, and employment over the next year. A 
producer of precast concrete products announced a 
large new plant in South Dakota, and a pipe 
manufacturer announced a new plant in Minnesota. 
Several suppliers to the wind power industry described 
demand as strong. Contacts in agricultural equipment 
said that activity remained slow overall, but conditions 
have improved from a year ago, as demand for some 
types of equipment picked up and inventories dropped.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak overall 
since the previous report. In spite of recent rains, severe 
drought conditions persisted in the Dakotas and 
Montana. Farmers in many areas were cutting failed 
cereal crops for hay, while livestock producers were 
selling off parts of their herds due to a lack of feed.  
Meanwhile, crop conditions remained much better in 
eastern parts of the District, and sugar beet growers in 
Minnesota and North Dakota were anticipating a 
potential record crop. Activity in the energy and mining 
sectors increased slightly since the last report. Montana 
coal production increased in recent months compared 
with a year earlier. District oil and gas exploration as of 
mid-August was flat compared with the previous report. 
Regulators approved a major expansion at a natural gas 
processing plant in the Bakken oil patch. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased modestly in late July and August, and most sectors expected moderate 
growth in future months. Professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade firms reported a strong increase in sales, and 
manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace. District energy activity expanded modestly compared to the previ-
ous survey period, and bankers reported steady to improving overall loan demand, stable deposit levels, and un-
changed loan quality. District real estate activity continued to increase at a slight pace, while consumer spending con-
tacts indicated growth was unchanged since the previous survey period. Agricultural conditions weakened but at a 
slower pace, with subdued farm income and slightly lower farmland values. In addition, transportation contacts indicated 
slightly lower sales than the previous survey period. Employment and employee hours rose slightly in late July and 
August, and contacts in most sectors reported moderate wage growth. Input prices were up moderately over the previ-
ous survey period, while selling prices increased modestly in most sectors. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment and employee hours across the District 
rose slightly in late July and August over the previous 
survey period, and modest increases were expected in 
coming months. Contacts in the wholesale trade, profes-
sional and high-tech services, real estate, education, 
health services, and manufacturing sectors reported an 
increase in employment, while contacts in the retail 
trade, auto sales, transportation, restaurants, and tour-
ism and hotels sectors noted a decline. All sectors ex-
cept the auto sales and tourism sectors expected an 
increase in employment in the months ahead. Since the 
previous survey period, average employee hours rose 
for all sectors except the retail trade, auto sales, and 
health services sectors, which experienced declines. 
Respondents noted a shortage of commercial drivers, 
salespeople, and service workers.   
Contacts in most sectors reported moderate wage 
growth, and expectations in the coming months were for 
strong wage growth. 
Prices  
Overall, input prices were up moderately compared to 
the prior survey period, while selling prices increased 
modestly and contacts expected additional price increas-
es in the months ahead. Respondents in the retail sector 
reported moderately higher input and selling prices, with 
both expected to continue to rise moderately moving 
forward. Restaurant input prices grew at a moderate 
pace, while selling prices edged up. Selling prices in the 
transportation sector declined slightly, while input prices 
were up moderately after falling in the previous survey. 
Construction prices continued to expand modestly with 
slight increases anticipated in the coming months. Manu-
facturers reported slight growth in prices for finished 
goods, and raw material costs continued to edge higher. 
Manufacturers expected moderate increases in both 
finished goods and raw material prices over the next few 
months. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was mostly flat in late July and 
August, while expectations for future growth increased at 
a modest pace. Retail sales decreased slightly over the 
previous survey period, but remained above year-ago 
levels. Several retailers noted an increase in sales for 
apparel and discounted items, while higher-priced prod-
ucts sold poorly. Contacts anticipated sales to rise mod-
erately in the next few months, and inventory levels were 
expected to increase modestly. Auto sales fell moderate-
ly, but were slightly above year-ago levels. Dealer con-
tacts anticipated a further slowdown in sales for the 
months ahead. Auto inventories were expected to rise 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
slightly heading forward. Restaurant sales increased 
strongly and were well above year-ago levels. Contacts 
expected a moderate increase in activity heading for-
ward. District tourism activity decreased slightly in late 
July and August, and was lower than a year ago. Tour-
ism contacts expected activity to fall further heading into 
the fall months.   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace in 
late July and August, and the majority of other business 
contacts reported moderate sales increases. Manufac-
turers reported sustained moderate growth in production, 
particularly for metals, aircraft, and electronics products. 
Shipments, new orders, and order backlog grew at a 
solid pace, and activity was higher than a year ago. 
Manufacturers’ capital spending plans rose moderately, 
and firms’ expectations for future activity remained favor-
able.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
wholesale trade firms reported strong sales increases, 
while transportation contacts indicated slightly lower 
sales than the previous survey. All firms expected a 
strong improvement in sales in the next six months. 
Professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade firms re-
ported strong capital spending plans, while transporta-
tion firms anticipated a slight decrease in capital expend-
itures heading forward. 
Real Estate and Construction  
Overall District real estate activity continued to increase 
at a slight pace in late July and August. Residential 
home sales were flat since the previous survey period, 
and contacts anticipated no change in the coming 
months. Sales of low- and medium-priced homes contin-
ued to outpace sales of higher-priced homes. Residential 
home prices and inventories were modestly higher than 
the previous survey period. Residential construction 
activity continued to expand at a slight pace, as con-
struction supply activity remained flat while new home 
starts and traffic of potential buyers rose. Expectations 
for overall residential construction activity were for a 
modest increase in the months ahead. Commercial real 
estate activity continued to expand modestly, as absorp-
tion, completions, construction underway, sales, and 
prices rose, while vacancy rates declined. Commercial 
real estate activity was expected to continue to increase 
at a modest pace moving forward. 
 
Banking 
Bankers reported steady to improving overall loan de-
mand for the month of August.  A majority of respond-
ents indicated a stable demand for commercial and 
industrial, commercial real estate, agricultural, and con-
sumer installment loans. Demand for residential real 
estate loans was mixed among respondents. Most bank-
ers indicated loan quality was unchanged compared to a 
year ago. In addition, most respondents expect loan 
quality to remain essentially the same over the next six 
months. Credit standards remained largely unchanged in 
all major loan categories. Finally, a majority of respond-
ents reported stable deposit levels.  
Energy 
Energy activity rose at a modest pace since the last 
survey period, and expectations for future activity re-
mained positive. The number of active oil and gas drilling 
rigs increased modestly across the District, particularly in 
Oklahoma. With rising rig counts and relatively stable oil 
and gas prices, oil and natural gas production is project-
ed to continue to increase in the District’s Niobrara and 
Anadarko shale regions through September. Natural gas 
activity has picked up modestly since the last survey 
period, particularly in the Arkoma basin in Oklahoma. 
Agriculture 
The District farm economy continued to soften since the 
previous reporting period, but the pace of the decline 
slowed somewhat. Crop prices decreased modestly in 
late July and August due to an increase in production 
expectations for the year. Livestock prices also declined 
modestly and some cattle feedlots reported modest 
losses. Although District contacts continued to report a 
decrease in farm income and loan repayment rates, the 
pace of the decline was slower than in recent periods. 
The continued decline in farm income again pushed 
farmland values lower, but only slightly, as values also 
appeared to stabilize in some parts of the District. In 
general, agricultural credit conditions continued to weak-
en and were expected to decline further in coming 
months. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Note: The information included in this report was collected before Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Texas. 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy continued to expand at a moderate pace over the past six weeks. Manufacturing output 
strengthened, and activity in nonfinancial services increased. Growth in retail sales accelerated, in part due to a rebound 
in auto sales. Home sales rose slightly, but office leasing activity was mixed. Loan volumes expanded, while demand for 
oilfield services was flat. Crop conditions remained mostly favorable. Employment, wages and prices increased. Out-
looks remained positive, although several contacts expressed concern that policy-related uncertainty would impact the 
broader economy. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose, and wage pressures were 
similar to or up slightly from the previous reporting peri-
od. Reports of labor shortages were widespread across 
sectors, particularly for skilled workers. Manufacturers 
added to payrolls, with some contacts noting that labor 
shortages were pushing up wages. The construction 
labor market generally remained tight. Hiring in the ser-
vices sector continued, but employment in retail was flat. 
Hiring in the upstream energy sector slowed, and some 
firms were considering reducing staff in the second half 
of the year. Airlines also noted a slower pace of hiring. 
Two staffing firms cited wage pressure for lower-level 
manufacturing positions, and one contact noted wage 
pressure for higher-level IT and engineering workers.   
Prices 
Selling prices increased at a faster pace than in the prior 
report, and contacts noted upward pressure on input 
costs. Staffing firms said pricing was flat, although one 
contact noted renegotiating certain contracts at lower 
rates. Airlines said ticket prices were stable in the do-
mestic market, but increased for South American routes. 
New home prices were flat, but there were several re-
ports of incentives and/or discounts being offered, partic-
ularly on speculative inventory. Grain and cattle prices 
fell during the reporting period, prompting financial con-
cerns for producers, and cotton prices were at breake-
ven levels. Gasoline and diesel prices rose over the 
reporting period following the increase in oil prices. 
Manufacturing  
The pace of expansion in the manufacturing sector 
picked up over the reporting period. Output growth 
strengthened for durable goods, led by increases in 
transportation equipment, machinery, and computer and 
electronic product manufacturing. Demand for fabricated 
metal manufacturing edged up, however, a few produc-
ers cited seasonal or energy-related weakness. Among 
nondurables, food manufacturers saw continued strength 
in demand. Exports remained a source of weakness for 
some manufacturers who sell internationally. Overall, 
outlooks were positive, although some expressed con-
cern about political uncertainty.  
Refinery utilization rates increased along the Gulf Coast. 
Chemical producers noted healthy global and domestic 
demand and higher year-over-year production. Outlooks 
for chemical manufacturers remained optimistic due to 
expectations of persistent feedstock cost advantages 
over their international counterparts. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales expanded at a markedly faster clip than in 
the prior period. One contact noted that the tax-free 
weekend stimulated sales. Sales of building materials 
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
and garden equipment rose. Auto sales rebounded 
following weakness in the prior reporting period; howev-
er, there were a few reports of softening demand in 
Houston and Central Texas. Contacts said margins have 
improved due to increased purchases of larger vehicles. 
Outlooks among retailers were mixed.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services expanded moderately 
over the past six weeks. Demand for staffing services 
increased at a moderate pace. Activity in Dallas-Fort 
Worth increased, while one contact noted an unexpected 
decline in demand from oil and gas firms in Houston. 
Professional and technical services firms saw revenue 
gains during the reporting period, although firms tied to 
the energy sector cited continued sluggish demand. 
Accommodation and food services contacts noted slight 
increases in revenues, while revenue at healthcare firms 
fell during the reporting period. Airlines said passenger 
demand was stable over the past six weeks. Domestic 
travel remained solid, and activity along South American 
routes improved.  
Transportation and warehousing firms noted higher 
revenues and an increase in cargo volumes since the 
last report. Rail cargo rose due to persistent strong gains 
in shipments of fracking sand, although shipments of 
petroleum products and motor vehicles declined further. 
Parcel shipments were flat over the reporting period but 
up from year-ago levels. Year-over-year growth in de-
mand was driven by increases in shipments of non-
durable goods, particularly food, apparel, petroleum and 
coal products, and plastics and rubber products. Out-
looks among nonfinancial services firms were cautiously 
optimistic, with some contacts expressing concern about 
the impact of the current political environment on the 
broader economy. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales were flat to up slightly over the reporting 
period. Contacts noted ongoing strength in sales of 
moderately-priced new homes; sales at the higher-price 
points softened, however. Buyers remained price-
sensitive and were shopping more for deals. One contact 
said that some master-planned communities are adjust-
ing lot sizes downward in future phases, to cater to the 
solid demand for moderately-priced product.  
Apartment leasing remained active in Austin, but rent 
growth has moderated and incentives were being offered 
at the high end in submarkets, where competition was 
intense among new properties in the leasing phase. 
Activity in Dallas-Fort Worth remained strong, although 
contacts expect growth to moderate. Apartment demand 
firmed up in Houston following earlier weakness, and 
outlooks were positive, with contacts expecting contin-
ued, gradual improvement.  
Office leasing activity stayed sluggish in Houston and 
vacancy rates were elevated, putting downward pressure 
on rents. Fundamentals in Houston’s industrial market 
were healthy given near-record-low vacancy rates. One 
contact noted that investor interest has picked up in 
Houston. Office and industrial leasing activity continued 
to be solid in Dallas-Fort Worth.  
Financial Services 
Loan demand increased at a somewhat faster pace than 
the previous reporting period. Growth in commercial and 
industrial loan volumes ticked up. Commercial and resi-
dential real estate loan balances grew at a slower pace 
than in the previous reporting cycle, while consumer 
lending declined. Both core deposit volumes and the 
interest paid on them expanded slightly. Sentiments 
about future business activity and loan demand re-
mained largely positive. 
Energy 
Demand for oilfield services held steady during the re-
porting period. Drilling activity expanded further in the 
Permian Basin, but has tapered off, on net, in the Elev-
enth District. Most contacts expect the rig count to re-
main flat or fall slightly through yearend, and some firms 
noted reducing capital expenditures for the remainder of 
the year. Outlooks were less optimistic compared with 
the previous report, as firms expect lower oil prices in the 
first half of 2018 and many firms have lowered their 
capital expenditure projections for next year. 
Agriculture 
Above-average moisture levels and cooler-than-normal 
weather boosted crop conditions. Sorghum and corn 
crop yields were better than average. However, grain 
prices fell below typical breakeven prices during the 
reporting period, and contacts noted it will take well-
above-average yields to offset the low prices. Cattle 
prices also trended lower, prompting some financial 
concerns for ranchers after several months of profitabil-
ity. Agricultural producers were concerned about the 
renegotiation of NAFTA, as many rely on export markets 
to sell their products. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of July 
through mid-August. Overall price inflation was flat, while upward wage pressures intensified and labor market condi-
tions tightened further. Sales of retail goods were unchanged, and growth in the consumer and business services sec-
tors remained strong. Manufacturing activity picked up at a moderate pace, and activity in the agriculture sector expand-
ed modestly. Contacts reported robust activity in residential real estate markets, and conditions in the commercial sector 
strengthened. Lending activity grew at a modest pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor market conditions tightened further, and upward 
wage pressure intensified in most parts of the District. 
Shortages of software engineers, particularly those with 
experience in cloud computing, boosted wages in the 
technology industry. Robust labor demand in the online 
retail sector boosted hiring in the Seattle area. Shortages 
of skilled labor somewhat restricted production in the 
manufacturing sector. While employee levels were un-
changed in the pharmaceutical industry, contacts noted 
that some large companies began to move some pro-
duction facilities to lower cost locales outside of the 
District.  Wages in the construction sector continued to 
climb due to shortages of qualified contractors. Invest-
ments in automation in the agriculture sector picked up 
further, as labor shortages persisted and businesses 
sought to increase production efficiency. Legalization of 
cannabis increased demand for low-skilled workers in 
parts of the District.   
Prices  
Overall, price inflation was flat over the reporting period. 
Strong demand from the construction sector boosted 
prices of raw materials and steel products. Strong de-
mand in the hospitality sector pushed up food and bever-
age prices at restaurants and hotels. Inflation remained 
low for branded pharmaceuticals, while prices of generic 
drugs continued to decline modestly. Continued elevated 
production reduced prices for some agricultural com-
modities. Mounting competitive pricing pressures in the 
retail grocery sector pushed prices lower.  
Retail Trade and Services 
On balance, the pace of retail sales was largely un-
changed from the previous period, but many contacts 
reported increasing competitive pressures from online 
retailers. Demand for automobiles grew at a similar pace 
to that of late summer last year. However, contacts 
reported that inventories of used vehicles remained 
elevated, particularly for sedans, as low fuel prices 
boosted demand for trucks and sport utility vehicles. 
Overall sales at grocery retail outlets were largely un-
changed from the prior reporting period, but contacts 
reported that traditional retailers faced growing competi-
tive pressure from multinational chains. Sales of apparel 
products declined modestly, and contacts reported con-
tinued competitive pressure from online retail outlets. 
Additionally, foot traffic at large shopping centers de-
clined further.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
grew at a strong pace. Domestic and international flight 
arrivals continued to increase at a robust pace, and 
contacts reported that airports were running at or above 
capacity. Activity in the hotel industry remained robust in 
Southern California, although contacts expect the strong 
pace of growth to slow somewhat at the start of next 
year. While the health-care industry faced some uncer-
The Beige Book ■ August 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
tainty around federal policy, demand for services 
strengthened, and investments in medical information 
technology picked up after a soft first half of the year. 
Demand for restaurant services continued to be strong. 
Sales of information technology services increased 
modestly, as declining sales of legacy product lines were 
more than offset by increased investment in cloud com-
puting and big data solutions.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace 
over the reporting period. Conditions in the steel sector 
improved, as global growth continued to strengthen and 
competitive pressures from abroad eased. Production of 
semiconductors rose modestly, while new orders rose 
strongly; contacts expect overall sales for 2017 to grow 
by nearly a double-digit pace. Production of pharmaceu-
ticals picked up over the first half of the year. Deliveries 
of commercial aircraft over the first seven months of the 
year grew at around the same pace as the prior year, 
while new orders increased substantially. 
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Activity in the agriculture sector picked up at a modest 
pace. Harvest yields of grain were strong. Dealers re-
ported that demand for used agricultural equipment 
picked up, while sales of new equipment were soft. 
Overcapacity in the energy generation industry hindered 
profitability somewhat, and contacts expect capital in-
vestments over the next few years to slow from histori-
cally high levels.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate market activity continued to grow at a robust 
pace. Residential construction activity remained strong 
throughout the District, particularly in urban centers. New 
construction activity was slowed only by shortages of 
available land. Supply constraints pushed inventories to 
very low levels and slowed home sales somewhat. Pric-
es continued to rise at a brisk pace, and contacts report-
ed that affordable housing shortages in Southern Califor-
nia remained a serious concern. Overall, commercial 
real estate activity picked up to a moderate pace. Declin-
ing foot traffic at large shopping centers continued to 
push up vacancy rates. Rents for commercial property 
edged up slightly. 
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity grew at a modest pace over the report-
ing period. Loan demand expanded modestly. Deposit 
growth weakened slightly due to increased competition 
from nonbank institutions. Credit quality remained un-
changed, and delinquency rates continued to be low. 
Contacts noted that regulatory costs continued to con-
strain profitability at community banks in some regions. ■ 


