The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
October 24, 2018 
October 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

National Summary 
    1 
Boston 
A-1
First District 
New York 
B-1
Second District 
Philadelphia  
C-1
Third District  
Cleveland 
D-1
Fourth District 
Richmond 
E-1
Fifth District 
Atlanta 
F-1
Sixth District 
Chicago 
G-1
Seventh District 
St. Louis 
H-1
Eighth District 
Minneapolis 
I-1
Ninth District  
Kansas City 
J-1
Tenth District 
Dallas 
K-1
Eleventh District 
San Francisco 
L-1
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
based on information collected on or before October 15, 2018. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity expanded across the United States, with the majority of Federal Reserve Districts reporting modest 
to moderate growth. New York and St. Louis indicated slight growth, overall, while Dallas reported robust growth driven 
by strong manufacturing, retail, and nonfinancial services activity. On balance, manufacturers reported moderate output 
growth; however, several Districts indicated that firms faced rising materials and shipping costs, uncertainties over the 
trade environment, and/or difficulties finding qualified workers. Demand for transportation services remained strong. 
Labor shortages were broadly noted and were linked to wage increases and/or constrained growth. Reports on com-
mercial and residential real estate were mixed, although several Districts saw rising home prices and low levels of 
inventory. Overall, consumer spending increased at a modest pace while consumer price growth ranged from modest 
to moderate. Travel and tourism generally picked up with a notable exception of North and South Carolina, where 
Hurricane Florence deterred tourism. Agricultural conditions were mixed as rainy weather helped some farmers but 
caused delays and crop damages for others, including the loss of crops and livestock due to Hurricane Florence.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment expanded modestly or moderately across most of the nation; San Francisco reported robust growth while 
three Districts reported little to no change. Employers throughout the country continued to report tight labor markets 
and difficulties finding qualified workers, including highly skilled engineers, finance and sales professionals, construc-
tion and manufacturing workers, IT professionals, and truck drivers. A couple of Districts reported that worker shortag-
es were restraining growth in some sectors. Many firms reported high turnover rates and difficulties retaining employ-
ees. Some businesses implemented non-wage strategies to recruit and retain workers, such as giving signing bonuses, 
offering flexible work schedules, and increasing vacation allowances. Wage growth was mostly characterized as mod-
est or moderate, though Dallas reported robust growth. Most businesses expected labor demand to increase modestly 
in the next six months, and looked for modest to moderate wage growth.  
Prices 
Prices continued to rise, growing at a modest to moderate pace in all Districts. Manufacturers reported raising prices of 
finished goods out of necessity as costs of raw materials such as metals rose, which they attributed to tariffs. Construc-
tion contract prices increased to cover rising costs of labor and materials. Retailers and wholesalers in some Districts 
raised selling prices as they continued to see increased costs in transportation and also worried about impending cost 
increases resulting from tariffs. Districts reported rising oil and fuel prices but gave mixed reports on movement of 
agricultural commodity prices.  
Boston 
Most firms reported continued expansion. Most retailers, 
hoteliers, manufacturers, and IT firms saw year-over-
year sales increases. Labor markets remained tight and 
wages increased at a moderate pace. Contacts reported 
moderately higher prices on average. Outlooks were 
cautiously optimistic.  
 
New York 
Activity in the regional economy has grown slightly in the 
latest reporting period, while labor markets have re-
mained very tight. Both input prices and selling prices 
have accelerated slightly. Residential and commercial 
real estate markets have been mixed.  
 
 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest pace. 
Tight labor markets constrained hiring to a modest pace 
but maintained moderate wage pressures. Price increas-
es remained modest. Notably, manufacturing resumed a 
moderate pace of growth. The growth outlook is generally 
positive despite some concerns that excessive invento-
ries will reduce future demand.  
Cleveland 
The District economy grew modestly. Firms widely report-
ed worker shortages and wage increases that were a little 
higher than the rate of inflation. Strong, upward pressures 
on fuel, building materials, and metals costs were noted. 
Nonfinancial services noted a pickup in activity, although 
retail and transportation lost momentum. Nonresidential 
construction activity improved slightly.  
Richmond 
The regional economy grew moderately since our previ-
ous report. Overall, labor demand strengthened, wages 
rose modestly, and price growth remained moderate. 
However, firms across several sectors suffered from 
Hurricane Florence. The hurricane caused production 
disruptions for manufactures, port closures, reduced 
travel and tourism, and damages to crops and livestock. 
Atlanta 
The economy expanded at a moderate pace. Labor mar-
kets remained tight, and reports of increasing merit per-
centages were more widespread. Nonlabor input costs 
continued to rise, on balance. Retail sales increased. The 
pace of residential construction grew modestly compared 
with year earlier levels, while nonresidential construction 
activity was up. Manufacturing activity remained strong.  
Chicago 
Growth was modest. Manufacturing production and em-
ployment grew moderately, consumer and business 
spending increased modestly, and construction and real 
estate activity was flat. Wages and prices rose modestly 
and financial conditions were little changed. Greater-than- 
usual precipitation slowed the agricultural harvest and 
reduced the quantity and quality of the crops.
St. Louis 
Economic conditions in the District have improved slight-
ly since our previous report. Reports from the manufac-
turing and services sectors were generally positive. The 
exception was the real estate sector, where reports were 
notably weaker that other sectors.  
Minneapolis 
Economic activity grew moderately in the Ninth District. 
Hiring demand was strong, but was held back by tight 
labor markets. Wages and prices both experienced 
moderate pressure. Residential construction rose in 
September. Manufacturing activity grew, but the outlook 
was uncertain due to trade policy and rising input costs. 
Farm harvests were expected to be strong, but falling 
international demand was exacerbating low prices.  
Kansas City 
Economic activity expanded moderately in September 
and early October, led by strong sales in the retail, whole- 
sale trade, transportation, and professional and high-tech 
sectors. Input prices and wage growth accelerated since 
the previous survey, and strong wage gains were 
anticipated in the months ahead. Energy activity also 
picked up, due to stronger activity in the oil sector.
Dallas 
Economic activity expanded at a solid pace. Healthy 
growth continued in manufacturing, retail and nonfinan-
cial services. Loan demand increased further while home 
sales were flat. Capacity constraints restrained growth in 
the energy sector. Widespread labor shortages pushed 
up wages while tariffs drove up input costs. Hiring contin-
ued, and outlooks remained quite optimistic.  
San Francisco 
Economic activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace. Conditions in the labor market tightened noticea-
bly, and price inflation increased moderately. Sales of 
retail goods picked up slightly, and activity in the con-
sumer and business services sectors was solid. Activity 
in the manufacturing sector expanded moderately. Activi-
ty in residential and commercial real estate markets was 
robust. Lending activity picked up moderately.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in most sectors expanded at a moderate to strong pace since August, although real estate markets 
showed mixed activity. Retailers reported robust sales increases, and travel and tourism enjoyed a strong summer 
season. Manufacturing firms posted moderate growth on balance, and IT firms showed results ranging from flat sales to 
double-digit growth. Residential real estate prices continued to rise in most First District states despite slower sales in 
some places. Commercial real estate activity was mixed across metro areas. Labor markets remained tight, and wage 
increases continued at a moderate pace. Price increases appeared more widespread and, in a few cases, reflected the 
impact of tariffs. Most contacts retained a positive outlook, although some perceived an increase in downside risks.    
Employment and Wages  
Most contacts said that labor markets remained tight. On 
balance, headcounts increased only slightly, and wage 
increases accelerated somewhat but remained moder-
ate. Retail hiring held steady, although some positions 
were hard to fill, and the restaurant industry on Cape 
Cod continued to experience binding labor shortages. All 
manufacturing contacts reported that they were hiring, 
but increases in employment were small, as contacts 
said that hiring and retaining qualified workers remained 
difficult. As a result, they were paying higher wages and 
salaries. At IT firms, employee headcounts and the labor 
turnover rate were stable, but the tight labor market 
spurred fresh wage increases at one firm. Several other 
IT firms said that wages had increased 3-4 percent since 
last year, mainly in order to cover cost-of-living increas-
es. Commercial real estate contacts noted that construc-
tion wages continued to rise at a moderate-to-robust 
pace to attract scarce labor in that market.  
Prices  
Pricing pressures intensified in response to a variety of 
factors, resulting in moderate price increases on aver-
age. At least one retailer expects tariffs on Chinese-
sourced goods to add upward pressure on the prices 
charged by their suppliers, although the extent of any 
price increases remains uncertain, and another retailer 
reported being unaffected by tariffs. New car prices are 
also expected to increase significantly to cover the bur-
den of recently implemented tariffs. All but one manufac-
turing contact reported charging higher prices, but a 
semiconductor firm indicated that increased competition 
was driving down the prices it could charge. Trucking 
costs—which increased 5 to 10 percent—continued to 
present a major problem, contributing to recent price 
increases by manufacturers. Also, three manufacturing 
firms faced higher input prices due to tariffs on Chinese 
goods and services that were not readily substitutable, 
and the firms expected to pass on (or had already 
passed on) to consumers at least some of the tariff bur-
dens. Two IT firms imposed moderate price increases 
recently, while others held prices steady on balance. 
Hotel room rates on Cape Cod were up almost 5 percent 
from last summer, but some lowered prices as needed in 
response to price competition from online home rentals. 
Construction costs continued to climb at a brisk pace in 
response to increases in the costs of construction labor, 
land, and raw materials, and one contact expects the 
higher costs to get passed on to tenants and buyers. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retailers reported moderate to very strong year-over-
year sales increases to September and expect sales to 
stay strong through year’s end. A state automotive trade 
association reported that auto sales fell sharply in Sep-
tember compared with the summer months, but whether 
that decline marks the beginning of a trend remains to be 
seen. Still, dealers believe that sales might be crimped 
moving forward in response to rising price tags for new 
cars and higher consumer financing costs.  
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Travel industry contacts reported that business remains 
strong. As of August, airline passenger traffic through 
Boston had increased 8 percent year-over-year. Port 
traffic in Boston increased this past summer as retailers 
accelerated imports to avoid tariffs that were slated for 
the fall. Hotel occupancy rates on Cape Cod were up 
about 5 percent from last year. The Cape’s restaurant 
industry suffered ongoing, acute labor shortages, and 
these are seen as placing a restraint on industry growth 
moving forward.  
 
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of the five manufacturing firms contacted, four reported 
sales that were either moderately or strongly higher year
-on-year, and one reported slightly lower year-on-year 
sales despite improved performance more recently. One 
manufacturer’s growth was held back by difficulties in 
finding qualified workers and by delays obtaining capital 
equipment. As noted above, three firms faced cost in-
creases associated with tariffs, but so far experienced no 
major impacts on sales. One firm also was subject to 
retaliatory tariffs on its exports to China, but thus far has 
suffered no decline in sales to that country. Capital ex-
penditure plans were unchanged from August. Four 
contacts retained a positive outlook, while another ex-
pects a recession in the second half of 2019.  
Information Technology Services  
Software and IT firms in the First District experienced 
further robust growth on balance in recent months, either 
on par with or somewhat faster than what was reported 
in August. Year-over-year revenue growth rates ranged 
from the high single digits to the low double digits, with 
one exception involving flat revenues. Recent perfor-
mance was boosted by increasing demand for new, 
cloud-based products. A contact that recently raised its 
prices noted that no customer turnover had resulted from 
that move so far. Overall, contacts were optimistic about 
the state of the industry and the economy in the coming 
quarters.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate activity was mixed across the 
First District. Leasing activity remained strong in the 
Boston area, but reportedly slowed somewhat in both the 
Hartford and Providence areas. A Hartford contact at-
tributed the weaker activity to slow economic growth in 
Connecticut. Office vacancy rates were described as 
very low for both Boston and Providence, reflecting 
positive net absorption that occurred in the past six 
months in both metro areas. Sales activity was described 
as stable. Construction activity held steady in the Boston 
area and was described as very limited in Connecticut. 
Borrowers for some construction projects in the Boston 
area have reportedly had to request higher loan amounts 
in order to cover higher-than-expected construction 
costs. The outlook dimmed in greater Hartford, but re-
mained cautiously optimistic elsewhere. Contacts contin-
ued to see downside risks, however, in the form of rising 
construction costs and rising long-term interest rates.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets were somewhat mixed. 
This report covers year-over-year performance through 
August 2018 for all areas except Connecticut, which 
failed to provide data due to an ongoing technical issue. 
Vermont statistics represent combined performance for 
single-family homes and condos. For single-family 
homes, closed sales increased in Boston, Maine and 
New Hampshire, decreased moderately in Rhode Island, 
and were down slightly in Massachusetts. Pending single
-family sales were up by robust margins in New Hamp-
shire and Massachusetts, down sharply in Rhode Island, 
and posted either small (Boston) or moderate (Maine) 
decreases elsewhere. For condos, closed sales in-
creased or stayed roughly flat in all reporting areas, 
while pending sales were mixed. Vermont saw a moder-
ate decrease in closed sales for the combination of 
condos and single-family homes, but its pending sales 
were up sharply. Single-family home prices increased in 
all areas by slim to robust margins, while condo prices 
increased in all areas except Rhode Island, which saw a 
moderate decline on that score. A Rhode Island contact 
noted that home inventories increased (from a year 
earlier) for the second straight month, following an ex-
tended period of inventory declines. Elsewhere, howev-
er, inventories continued to decline. Despite recent fluc-
tuations in sales activity, contacts expressed optimism 
for the coming months. They cited the holiday season 
and tax cuts as possible reasons to expect an increase 
in sales before the end of the year. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has grown slightly since the last report. The labor market has remained very 
tight, and wage growth has remained moderate. Businesses reported increasingly widespread escalation in both input 
prices and selling prices, while prices of final goods and services have been steady or up modestly. Manufacturing and 
distribution activity continued to grow robustly, while growth has slowed in a number of service industries. Consumer 
spending was generally steady in recent weeks. Residential and commercial real estate markets have been mixed. 
Finally, banks reported some weakening in household loan demand and a modest pickup in delinquencies on home 
mortgages.      
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained very tight across the 
District. Employers continued to note difficulties finding 
qualified workers for various types of job openings. 
However, there have been scattered signs of softening in 
labor demand. One New York City based employment 
agency noted a lull in new postings in early October, and 
an upstate agency indicated some slowing in demand for 
contract workers.   
Businesses in most industries report steady to modestly 
rising employment. In the finance, professional & busi-
ness services, and manufacturing industries fewer con-
tacts than last time indicated that they are adding work-
ers. On the other hand, businesses in wholesale trade, 
leisure & hospitality, and education & health services 
noted some pickup in hiring activity. Retailers reported 
little change in staffing levels, and one large chain said 
they plan to hire roughly the same number of holiday-
season workers as in 2017.  
Wage pressures have remained fairly widespread. While 
businesses in most industries noted that wage growth 
has remained moderate thus far, a growing proportion 
reported that they plan to raise wages in the months 
ahead. A New York City employment agency noted a 
widening gap between salary expectations of job appli-
cants and what employers are offering.            
Prices  
Businesses reported increasingly widespread hikes in 
both input and selling prices. Input price pressures were 
reported across all industry sectors; they picked up in the 
wholesale trade, information, and real estate industries 
but receded slightly among manufacturers and retailers. 
Contacts in almost all sectors anticipated further increas-
es in the months ahead—particularly those in wholesale 
trade and information.  
More businesses than in recent months said they had 
raised selling prices—most notably in wholesale trade 
and leisure & hospitality. Retailers generally indicated 
that selling prices have been stable to up modestly. A 
sizable and rising proportion of contacts in wholesale 
trade and transportation said they planned to hike prices 
in the months ahead, while fewer leisure & hospitality 
firms said they would do so. A few contacts in manufac-
turing and distribution cited tariffs for driving up costs 
and inducing them to raise their prices.   
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were mixed but, on balance, flat in Septem-
ber and early October. Non-auto retailers generally 
indicated that sales were flat or up modestly. One large 
retail chain noted that sales were running on plan and up 
slightly from year-earlier levels. New York City lagged 
the rest of the District slightly in the latest reporting peri-
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
od, partly reflecting weaker tourism. Retailers in upstate 
New York reported that sales picked up somewhat since 
the last report. Inventories were characterized as being 
at or a bit below optimal levels.  
New vehicle sales weakened in September, according to 
dealers across upstate New York, and were down from a 
year earlier—partly attributed to reduced incentives. New 
vehicle inventories continued to run at or above desired 
levels. Sales of used vehicles have remained fairly ele-
vated, though there were signs of slowing. Business at 
auto service departments has also slowed somewhat. 
Dealers continued to characterize retail and wholesale 
credit conditions as being in good shape. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) surged to a new cyclical high in September, 
based on the Conference Board’s survey.   
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers indicated that activity continued to expand 
briskly in recent weeks. Wholesalers reported a renewed 
pickup in growth in September, while transportation firms 
noted a pause in growth. Regarding the near-term busi-
ness outlook, both wholesale distributors and manufac-
turers continued to express fairly widespread optimism, 
while transportation industry contacts have been more 
measured in their expectations. A number of contacts in 
these sectors expressed concern about tariffs.        
Services 
Growth slowed noticeably in the latest reporting period. 
Contacts in professional & business services reported 
continued modest growth in activity, but businesses 
engaged in education & health services noted a pause in 
growth, while those in the leisure & hospitality and infor-
mation industries noted a dip in activity. However, Broad-
way theaters reported continued growth in both attend-
ance and revenues, both of which were running well 
ahead of comparable 2017 levels. Looking ahead, busi-
nesses in education & health services, professional & 
business services, and information industries continued 
to express optimism about the near-term outlook. Lei-
sure & hospitality businesses said they expect business 
to be flat to up slightly.          
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
since the last report. In New York City, sales of existing 
co-ops and condos were down modestly, while sales of 
new units fell more sharply, albeit from elevated levels. 
In contrast, condo sales were said to be up noticeably in 
Westchester County. Single-family home sales were 
steady to down modestly in the suburbs around New 
York, including northern New Jersey. One contact as-
cribed some of this weakness to changes in federal tax 
law that limit deductibility of homeowner costs.  
The inventory of homes on the market has risen through-
out most of the District—particularly for smaller units in 
New York City. Still, current inventory levels remain quite 
low, particularly in upstate New York. Home price trends 
have been mixed, with values continuing to rise in up-
state New York, Long Island, and northern New Jersey, 
but holding steady across New York City and its northern 
suburbs. Prices of new condos in New York City, as well 
as prices at the high end of the condo market more 
generally, have weakened noticeably.  
The apartment rental market has been mixed. Manhat-
tan’s vacancy rate declined to its lowest level in a dec-
ade, reflecting a noticeable expansion in landlord con-
cessions. Effective rents have trended down across New 
York City due to these increased concessions.   
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
mostly steady. Office availability rates edged up in New 
York City, Long Island, and across much of upstate New 
York, while rents were little changed. In northern New 
Jersey, however, availability rates edged down, while 
rents were flat. Retail markets weakened across most of 
the District, with rents drifting down in New York City, 
Fairfield County, and across much of upstate New York. 
In contrast, industrial markets have continued to 
strengthen, with rents up 5-8 percent from a year earlier 
and availability rates mostly steady or declining.   
New multi-family construction has tapered off somewhat 
across the District but a substantial volume of residential 
space is currently under construction—particularly in 
New York City. New office construction remains sub-
dued. New industrial construction has remained sluggish 
across upstate New York, but it has strengthened in the 
New York City area.         
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks reported lower demand for 
consumer loans and residential mortgages, but steady 
demand for commercial mortgages and C&I loans. 
Banks reported tighter credit standards for commercial 
loans and mortgages but unchanged standards on 
household-sector loans. Loan spreads widened for resi-
dential and commercial mortgages. Finally, bankers 
reported a rise in delinquency rates for residential mort-
gages but unchanged rates for all other categories. ■  
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. The labor market remains tight, which continues to constrain hiring at a modest pace and to apply upward wage 
pressures at a moderate rate. Price pressures remained modest, with a smaller percentage of firms reporting increases 
in prices paid and received for their own goods than during the prior period. Nonfinancial services maintained a moder-
ate pace of growth, and manufacturers resumed a moderate pace after slowing last period. Most consumer sectors 
continued at a modest pace. Construction sectors noted slight growth, while residential real estate sales remained con-
strained by low inventories; commercial leasing maintained modest growth. The growth outlook over the next six months 
remained positive, with over half of all firms anticipating increases in general activity; however, key industrial supply 
firms noted concern that future demand may fall because of excessive inventory buildups by their customers. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. Over 40 percent of the 
manufacturing firms reported an increase in net employ-
ment, and over 25 percent of the nonmanufacturing firms 
reported net increases in full-time staff. Also, the per-
centage of firms that reported decreases in average 
hours worked was lower than in the prior period.  
Several firms noted that their job levels would be higher 
if they could find and retain employees. One firm noted 
difficulty launching a third shift because of a lack of 
workers; another firm – already at full capacity – will add 
cobots (or collaborative robots) to increase throughput. 
Likewise, staffing firms continued to report demand for 
new placements but limitations because of a lack of 
qualified candidates and difficulty retaining employees.  
On balance, wage growth continued at a moderate pace. 
Nearly half of the nonmanufacturing contacts reported 
increases in wage and benefit costs. Most large firms 
reported modest, steady wage hikes, while some smaller 
firms appear to be catching up with wage hikes in excess 
of 3 percent. Staffing firms reported that resistance to 
raising starting wages softened further among their 
clients after years of holding wages steady.  
Prices  
Price increases remained modest for most firms, and the 
percentage of firms that reported increases was lower 
than in the prior period. Among nonmanufacturing firms, 
about one-fourth reported increases for prices paid and 
for prices received. Likewise, just one-fourth of the man-
ufacturing firms reported increases in prices received for 
their own goods. For prices paid, less than half of the 
manufacturers noted increases – down from nearly two-
thirds last period.  
One firm noted significant pushback to its announced 
price hikes from a major retail customer. Other firms 
reported difficulty meeting the prices of foreign competi-
tors who are not exposed to tariffs on the primary input 
commodities of their products.  
Looking ahead six months, manufacturing firms contin-
ued to anticipate higher prices, with just over half expect-
ing increases in prices paid and slightly under half ex-
pecting increases in prices received for their own goods.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity resumed a more moderate pace 
of growth – after dropping almost to its nonrecession 
average during the prior period. On balance, the firms 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
reported improvements primarily as an increase in new 
orders, while shipments remained about the same.  
The makers of lumber products, paper products, chemi-
cals, fabricated metal products, electronic machinery, 
and industrial machinery tended to note gains in new 
orders and shipments; the makers of primary metal 
products reported mixed results. Several key industrial 
suppliers believe their clients placed excessive orders to 
boost inventories in advance of tariffs and now expect 
that demand will be lower over the next six months to a 
year. The firms continued to note greater uncertainty 
owing to tariffs and the threat of tariffs.  
On balance, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
general activity to increase over the next six months, 
with half of the firms expecting future increases in new 
orders and shipments. The firms’ outlook for future em-
ployment remained nearly the same, with just under 40 
percent expecting increases. However, expectations of 
future capital expenditures fell further but remain above 
nonrecession averages.  
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retailers reported strong back-to-school sales 
during August and modest growth for convenience 
goods in September and early October. While retailers 
generally credited the growing economy and strong 
consumer confidence, the strong August sales also 
benefited by comparison to weak sales in August 2017.  
According to dealers, September year-over-year auto 
sales were up slightly in Pennsylvania and down mod-
estly in New Jersey. Year-to-date sales remained very 
close to the high 2017 sales level. Dealers expressed 
ongoing concerns about rising interest rates and poten-
tial tariff impacts on new car prices.  
On balance, tourism contacts continued to report modest 
growth. One contact reported very strong demand in the 
Poconos region despite bad weather and slightly higher 
gas prices – 2017 was a record year, and 2018 has been 
even better thus far. Shore activity has been mixed, with 
Delaware contacts noting strong traffic but weaker 
spending patterns. Meanwhile, Atlantic City casinos 
posted strong gains again during the month of August.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms continued to report 
moderate growth in general activity. However, the per-
centage of firms reporting increased sales edged back to 
50 percent, and the percentage reporting increased new 
orders dropped to 33 percent. One large service-sector 
firm noted continued improvement in customer retention 
and on-time payments. Expectations of future growth 
broadened slightly, with two-thirds of the firms anticipat-
ing increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report modest growth in 
overall loan volumes on a year-over-year basis 
(excluding credit cards). During the current period, loan 
volumes grew at a slightly slower pace than during the 
same period last year. Volumes (reported without sea-
sonal adjustments) grew moderately in mortgages, in 
autos, and in other consumer loans (not elsewhere clas-
sified). However, these gains were offset by slight de-
clines in home equity lines and by modest declines in 
commercial real estate lending and in commercial and 
industrial lending.  
Credit card lending also grew at a modest pace on a 
year-over-year basis. During the current period, credit 
card lending was flat because of seasonal factors.  
Banking contacts continued to note rising competition for 
loans and bank deposits and noted concerns that credit 
standards were slipping. However, they cited no signs of 
credit quality deterioration.  
Real Estate and Construction 
On balance, homebuilders reported a slight improvement 
in September following weak activity at the end of Au-
gust. Contacts reported less optimism for growth in 
2019. Inventories of existing for-sale homes continued to 
fall and to constrain sales. Although a few local markets 
saw year-over-year increases, sales appear to have 
declined modestly overall.  
Overall, rents remained strong in the slowly growing 
nonresidential real estate market, especially for offices 
and industrial warehouses. One firm reports that demand 
for industrial space continues to outstrip supply in south-
ern New Jersey and the Lehigh Valley. Meanwhile, in 
Trenton, NJ, and Carlisle, PA, the local labor markets 
are struggling to supply sufficient labor to meet demand. 
Commercial contractors noted an uptick in labor hours 
for August and September, but large projects are wind-
ing down, and nonresidential construction activity is 
expected to wane over the next year. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District grew modestly during the survey period and firms reported customer demand was 
stable. Reports suggest that hiring continued at about the same moderate pace as in recent months. Contacts reported 
ongoing shortages of both the quantity and quality of available labor and firms increased wages modestly to reduce 
worker turnover. Upward pressure on input costs was strong, notably for metals, construction materials, and fuel. Final 
selling prices increased as manufacturers, builders, and transportation firms raised their prices to cover their increased 
input costs. Manufacturing capacity utilization rose to keep up with strong demand. Freight demand plateaued at a high 
level and firms are increasingly feeling the pinch from limited trucking capacity. Retail demand, excluding autos, was 
flat. Nonresidential construction activity picked back up after a lull during the prior period.  
Employment and Wages  
District employers reported hiring activity that was broad-
based across sectors and momentum that was similar to 
that in recent survey periods. Contacts generally report-
ed business conditions that were favorable and stable as 
supporting their overall demand for workers. However, 
worker shortages, in terms of both quantity and quality, 
were noted across many sectors. One retailer remarked 
that the firm’s headcount was unintentionally lower be-
cause it was losing warehouse workers faster than it can 
replace them. One trucking contact reported that it had 
10 empty trucks because of its inability to find enough 
drivers with Class A commercial driver’s licenses. Some 
manufacturers reported increases in overtime hours 
worked. In addition to limited labor supply, contacts 
noted that overall gains in staff levels were limited by 
high worker turnover. 
Overall wage trends were comparable to those of recent 
survey periods, with many contacts reporting wage 
increases that were slightly above the rate of inflation. In 
every industry, contacts noted that increased competition 
was requiring their firms to boost wages to retain work-
ers. Yet a number of contacts speculated the raises were 
not likely sufficient to stem worker turnover. There were 
a few cases in which wage increases were much strong-
er than average. One retailer gave a 9 percent raise to 
new and current staff in the hope that the higher wage 
will reduce turnover. One construction contact reported 
taking a more targeted approach by giving 10 percent to 
15 percent raises on a case-by-case basis; firm-wide, 
wages were raised by only about 2 percent. In profes-
sional services, contacts reported using bonuses and 
non-wage components to increase compensation.  
Prices  
Upward pressure on nonlabor input prices was strong, 
although prices rose for slightly fewer contacts than in 
the last report. Construction contacts reported increases 
in prices for LED lighting, concrete, steel, lumber, and 
copper. The majority of contacts attributed at least some 
of these increases to import tariffs. One trucking contact 
noted that prices for pallet jacks, tires, and packaging 
material were higher because of the tariffs. Only one 
construction contact noted that the diversion of materials 
for hurricane relief may have had an additional impact on 
prices. A few contacts remarked that the amount of time 
suppliers held their prices constant had diminished no-
ticeably. In other sectors, higher fuel costs were report-
ed.  
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
Final selling prices rose with about the same momentum 
as in the prior period. Freight and construction firms 
were less aggressive in raising their prices than in the 
previous survey period. Construction contacts comment-
ed that they were raising their prices enough to maintain 
their margins. By contrast, one builder remarked his firm 
was holding prices and offering more incentives and 
giveaways. Nearly two-thirds of manufacturing contacts 
raised their prices this period. This was the fifth consecu-
tive reporting period wherein more than half of manufac-
turing contacts reported raising their prices. Service-
sector industries reported relatively more modest price 
increases as firms attempted to cover rising worker 
compensation costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Retail demand was flat during this period, breaking a 
nearly year-long trend of improving demand. Expecta-
tions for the near-term were mixed: retailers of nondura-
ble goods expect demand to pick back up in advance of 
the holiday season, but auto retailers expect demand to 
remain flat. Auto retailers noted that new vehicle sales 
have declined slightly because of rising interest rates 
and increased unit prices. As a result, buyers have shift-
ed somewhat toward used vehicles. Retailers with broad 
footprints noted that sales within the Fourth District were 
roughly in line with national retail sales. Retail profit 
margins were generally unchanged and inventory levels 
were reported to be good.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing demand remained strong, and contacts 
cited strong economic fundamentals as the cause. In-
dustrial equipment manufacturers reported strong de-
mand from the automotive, agriculture, and construction 
equipment industries. Some steel and heavy equipment 
manufacturers noted that demand was down slightly 
compared with demand two months earlier, but it was 
particularly strong in the early summer months as cus-
tomers sped up purchases ahead of anticipated price 
increases. Several contacts reported increased capacity 
utilization to keep up with strong demand, while long 
lead times and tariff-related gaps in supply chains have 
caused mismatches in inventories. Contacts reported 
that they have increased their capital expenditures to 
keep up with customer demand and to fill supply chain 
gaps left by suppliers’ capacity constraints. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported that demand fell modestly, but 
they do not expect demand to fall further in the near 
future. Homebuilders point to a decrease in home afford-
ability as the primary driver of this demand decrease. 
Lower-priced homes are selling better than more expen-
sive homes. Builders are reducing the number of spec 
homes they are building. Real estate contacts reported 
an increase in homeowners relative to renters. These 
contacts also reported stable housing inventory and 
consistent demand from first-time homebuyers. 
Nonresidential builders reported a pickup in demand 
after a lull during the prior period. Demand growth was 
driven by private spending; demand from the public side 
was still low. Builders note that backlogs are still high 
and pointing to strength in the broader economy, and 
they expect growth to continue in the near term. Nonresi-
dential construction prices are rising as builders pass 
through increasing materials costs, especially for metals, 
but builders are not increasing their margins. 
Financial Services 
Bankers reported that overall conditions held steady 
during the last two months. Some contacts reported that 
demand for commercial and industrial loans softened as 
businesses shifted to cash earned in the strong economy 
while another noted increased activity in commercial real 
estate and in mergers and acquisitions. Mortgage de-
mand and core deposits were a bit stronger than the 
previous survey period, but contacts noted that this 
strengthening may be a seasonal trend. Delinquency 
rates remained low; one contact reported that the delin-
quency rate was at a record low, suggesting that finan-
cial conditions are strong.    
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms reported stronger demand as 
the macro economy continued its ascent. Business 
advisory and IT firms attributed the favorable business 
conditions to their clients enjoying tax savings, higher 
revenues, strong business confidence, and increased 
budgets for digital transformation. Contacts reported that 
plans for capital investments held steady. In the trans-
portation sector, demand plateaued at a high level. Con-
tacts reported that limited freight capacity continues to 
hamstring growth in the industry. One trucking contact 
noticed growing discontent among members along the 
food supply chain, from grain producers all the way to 
restaurants, about the limited availability of trucks to 
transport their goods. This contact also noted that these 
firms were all planning to pass rising transportation costs 
through to their customers in a variety of ways. ■ 
 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Since our previous report, the Fifth District economy expanded at a moderate rate. On balance, manufacturing activity 
expanded moderately; however, rising materials costs and some hurricane-related disruptions were reported. Imports 
increased and exports declined but some Fifth District ports sustained property damage due to Hurricane Florence. 
Trucking activity remained robust despite highway and service center closures in hurricane-affected areas. Tourism and 
business travel also fell due to Hurricane Florence, as many travelers canceled bookings and coastal areas were evacu-
ated. Farm animals were killed and crops were damaged by Hurricane Florence and by rainy weather, in general. Resi-
dential and commercial real estate activity picked up modestly. At the same time, loan demand picked up. Meanwhile, 
demand for nonfinancial services rose at a moderate pace. Labor demand strengthened and job openings increased 
while wage increases remained temperate. In general, prices continued to grow at a moderate rate.   
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks, and employment agencies reported a pick-up in 
new job openings. Meanwhile, employers continued to 
report very tight labor markets and difficulties finding 
qualified workers. Staffing firms saw stronger demand, 
particularly for customer service representatives and 
human resource professionals. Additionally, firms report-
ed a need for more construction workers, engineers, IT 
professionals, accounting and finance professionals, 
plant workers, mechanics, and truckers. Wage increases 
remained modest.  
Prices  
Overall, prices continued to grow moderately in recent 
weeks. According to our latest surveys, manufacturer’s 
selling prices grew at a moderate rate while their input 
prices rose at a slightly faster rate. Specifically, contacts 
reported price increases for packaging materials, paper, 
steel, aluminum, resin, and concrete. Additionally, a food 
manufacturer saw higher prices for poultry and eggs. 
Service sector firms reported moderate price growth in 
prices paid and prices received. Shipping costs contin-
ued to increase, according to firms in both manufacturing 
and services sectors. Coal prices rose slightly in recent 
weeks while natural gas prices increased at a moderate 
rate.  
Manufacturing 
Fifth District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
in recent weeks. A North Carolina fabric producer report-
ed robust demand, and a Virginia window manufacturer 
attributed strong sales to high consumer confidence. 
However, many manufacturers struggled with rising 
costs of raw materials, some of which was attributed to 
the recent tariffs. A Virginia display case manufacturer 
looked to import materials from countries other than 
China. Several firms reported negative impacts from 
Hurricane Florence, which included lost production time, 
reduced demand, and/or larger backlogs. One firm said 
they could make up the production deficit with overtime, 
but it was going to be more expensive.  
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports saw mixed conditions in recent weeks. 
Some ports suffered losses from Hurricane Florence in 
the form of closures, property damage, and storm prepa-
ration costs. Overall, imports remained strong while 
exports decreased modestly. Port contacts attributed 
some of the export decline to the recent tariffs on Ameri-
can goods and believed that imports remained strong 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
because orders were placed early, in anticipation of tariff 
increases. Meanwhile, a South Carolina airport reported 
booming business, unaffected by storms or tariffs, as 
both passenger and cargo flights continued to grow. 
Trucking activity remained robust since our last report. 
Demand stayed strong and companies continued to turn 
down business because of a lack of drivers. One North 
Carolina trucking company invested in new service 
centers to help with business growth, but another wor-
ried about rising costs of equipment. District truckers did 
see some effects from Hurricane Florence, largely com-
ing from highway and service center closures as well as 
additional costs associated with protecting equipment.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Reports on tourism were mixed since our last report, as 
Hurricane Florence discouraged people from visiting 
parts of the Fifth District. In Charleston, South Carolina, 
hotel occupancy fell significantly, and many hotels and 
restaurants closed as employees evacuated the area. In 
Asheville, North Carolina, hotels faced high levels of 
cancellations and local attractions lost business be-
cause of the hurricane. However, tourism in areas not 
affected by Florence was healthy. For example, a West 
Virginia resort reported strong business growth and high 
bookings for the coming months. 
Fifth District retailers reported modest activity in recent 
weeks. A South Carolina auto dealer reported a slight 
uptick in business despite a downturn in sales at other 
local dealerships. Many stores saw sales growth and 
expected it to continue through the end of the year. 
However, retailers also expressed concerns about rising 
costs, some of which were attributed to the recent tariffs, 
and their inability to pass the cost increase through to 
customers.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate firms indicated modest growth, 
overall. Home sales rose modestly in recent weeks and 
buyer traffic was steady, although low levels of inventory 
persisted. District home prices increased slightly, while 
days on the market were generally unchanged at low 
levels. Meanwhile, residential construction reportedly 
picked up in the District of Columbia, Virginia, South 
Carolina, and Maryland. Builders reported strong back-
logs, although speculative construction remained lim-
ited.   
Commercial real estate leasing rose modestly in recent 
weeks. District brokers reported increased demand for 
restaurant, grocery, and industrial space, while retail 
activity was stable to increasing. Office leasing varied 
across the District. A North Carolina broker stated that 
urban office space is in high demand, leading to new 
construction and conversions. Meanwhile, vacancy rates 
decreased slightly across all sub-markets, and contacts 
reported that limited inventory pushed rental rates up 
slightly. On the commercial sales side, brokers reported 
modest increases in prices and sales. Multifamily leasing 
remained healthy, although reports on construction 
activity varied across the District.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, loan demand rose moderately in recent weeks. 
Residential mortgage demand was generally described 
as stable to increasing modestly. On the commercial 
side, real estate loan demand strengthened moderately. 
Business loan demand increased slightly, on balance, 
while automotive lending was reportedly flat. Bankers in 
Virginia and the District of Columbia reported increased 
C&I lending in recent weeks. A West Virginia banker saw 
higher than normal deposit growth and an uptick in loan 
demand in oil and gas areas of the state and a leveling 
off in demand elsewhere. Deposits grew moderately 
since our last report and contacts continued to report 
increased rate competition among banks. Credit quality 
remained stable at high levels.  
Nonfinancial Services 
The demand for nonfinancial services grew moderately 
in recent weeks. An accounting firm reported stronger 
demand, particularly from clients in the professional 
services, information, and manufacturing sectors. One 
firm attributed their increased business to a newly 
awarded federal contract while another firm saw more 
bid opportunities. Meanwhile, healthcare service provid-
ers continued to report strong business conditions.  
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Natural gas production increased slightly in recent weeks 
while coal production was little changed. Farmers in 
North Carolina lost crops and livestock to flooding from 
Hurricane Florence. A farmer in South Carolina who was 
not directly affected by the hurricane, but had a lot of rain 
since, was at risk of losing some crops. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity expanded at a moderate pace from mid-
August through September, and most expect the pace to continue through the last quarter of the year. The labor market 
remained tight, and reports of wage pressures increased. Firms continued to note increasing nonlabor costs and a 
growing number of contacts reported the ability to pass along those increases. Retailers, including automobile dealers, 
cited slightly higher sales since the previous report. Tourism activity exceeded expectations. Contacts reported that 
residential real estate market activity expanded at a modest pace, and commercial real estate activity was robust. Man-
ufacturing activity was solid with purchasing managers noting increased new orders and production since the previous 
report. Bankers cited that activity was healthy, on balance.  
Employment and Wages  
While business contacts across the District reported 
increasing staffing levels, firms continued to cite that 
tightening labor markets, particularly among low-skill/
hourly jobs, were restraining business activity. Con-
straints to growth were especially acute in construction, 
transportation, and manufacturing; while some contacts 
in food services also indicated turning down new busi-
ness, reducing shifts, or occasional fast food store clo-
sures. Contrastingly, contacts continued to note that 
technological advances in agricultural, financial, and 
manufacturing processes had reduced the number of 
workers needed.  
A growing number of firms over the reporting period 
experienced an uptick in merit increases for workers; 
several contacts reported average merit raises in the 3 to 
3.5 percent range. Many continued to mention that rising 
labor costs were a challenge, leading some firms to 
expand their geographical search for workers, relocate 
operations to lower cost labor markets, outsource work 
domestically and/or abroad, or “wait it out” by not filling 
certain positions.        
Prices  
Firms across the District continued to report rising nonla-
bor input costs, with some ability to pass along price 
increases. As noted in the previous report, anticipation of 
rising costs related to tariffs contributed to vendor price 
increases for commodities. The Atlanta Fed’s Business 
Inflation Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit 
costs were up 2.0 percent in September. Survey re-
spondents indicated they expect unit costs to rise 2.2 
percent over the next twelve months.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retailers reported a slight increase in sales levels 
since the last report. Some contacts noted that tourist 
related retail sales were stronger than expected over the 
last two months. Automotive dealers reported an uptick 
in the level of sales of small SUVs and light trucks in 
September compared to a year ago. 
Tourism and hospitality contacts in the District reported 
higher than expected tourism activity since the previous 
report. Hotel occupancy and average daily rates were 
higher than expected in tourist destination cities in Flori-
da, Georgia, and Louisiana. Year-to-date Mississippi 
casino gaming revenue increased compared to the same 
time period last year. District contacts remain optimistic 
about activity in the fourth quarter.      
Construction and Real Estate 
On balance, reports from District residential real estate 
contacts indicated decelerating, but still positive, growth. 
Many builders reported that construction activity was up 
from the year-ago level. Lot and land availability remain 
constraints on building activity, but contacts noted that 
land costs have plateaued. Contacts characterized buyer 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
traffic as steady, but with a low rate of conversion to 
sales. District builders expect home sales activity to 
remain at current levels for the next few months. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts noted 
continued strong demand. The majority of commercial 
contractors indicated that, on balance, the pace of non-
residential construction at least matched the year-ago 
level. Most contacts reported a healthy pipeline of activi-
ty. Industrial contacts noted that backlogs were steady 
rather than growing and retail contacts described activity 
as stable. Contacts expressed concern that material 
price uncertainty presents an ongoing challenge to bid-
ding and fulfilling projects. The outlook for nonresidential 
and multifamily construction across the District remained 
positive though uncertain, with the majority of contacts 
anticipating activity to match or exceed the current level.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing firms reported that overall business activi-
ty was solid since the previous report. Most contacts 
indicated that new orders and production levels were 
increasing at a healthy pace. Purchasing managers cited 
extended delivery times for supply orders and continued 
upward pressure on input prices. Expectations for future 
production levels increased slightly from the previous 
period, with a little more than one-third of contacts ex-
pecting higher production over the next six months.  
Transportation 
On balance, transportation activity across the District 
was little changed since the previous report. District 
ports continued to report considerable growth in freight. 
District railroads noted year-over-year increases in total 
traffic, led by substantial increases in the volumes of 
petroleum and petroleum products, pulp and paper prod-
ucts, aggregates and metallic ores; these increases were 
partially offset by declines in non-metallic minerals 
(including phosphates) and coke. Year to date, total 
railroad activity was up slightly over last year. Freight 
forwarders reported significant capital investments in 
facilities, aircrafts, and fleets as capacity constraints 
mounted due to steady increases in domestic and inter-
national volume. While noting some challenges, trans-
portation contacts indicated no significant disruptions in 
the movement of freight as a result of changes in trade 
policy.  
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions remained healthy. 
Earnings continued to grow as higher interest rates 
drove improvement in net interest margins. Credit quality 
metrics remained positive with charge-offs and nonac-
cruals still at historic lows. However, financial institutions 
were reportedly starting to loosen underwriting standards 
due to slowing demand for credit and increased competi-
tion. Contacts indicated that financial institutions were 
relying more on borrowings and noncore deposits to fund 
asset growth. In addition, competition for core deposits 
was fueling an increase in mergers and acquisitions.  
Energy  
Onshore crude oil and natural gas production continued 
to accelerate, spurring exports of both products from 
Gulf Coast terminals. Refinery utilization rates remained 
high and stable from the previous reporting period. Utili-
ties contacts reported that while residential and commer-
cial demand for power was flat to slightly down, industrial 
demand was strong. Regarding recently imposed tariffs, 
many energy contacts shared that their businesses had 
responded by reorganizing supply chains. Technological 
advancement in areas such as robotics and global moni-
toring of control centers and pipelines continued to en-
hance efficiencies for the District’s energy sector. Con-
tacts continued to point out that business growth was 
constrained by inadequate supply of truck drivers and 
highly specialized tradespeople.  
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District remained 
mixed. By late September, most of the District was 
drought-free. District corn, soybean, cotton, and peanut 
harvests were close to their five-year averages although 
by late September, significant rain in Tennessee resulted 
in some crop damage and delays in harvesting. Year-
over-year prices paid to farmers in August were up for 
corn, cotton, rice, and eggs, while soybean, beef, and 
broiler prices were down. Contacts remained concerned 
about tariffs and trade conflicts although there was some 
optimism concerning the newly agreed upon United 
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. Recent reports indi-
cated cropland values in the District rose from 2017 to 
2018 with the exception of Florida where cropland values 
were flat. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District slowed to a modest pace in late August and September, and con-
tacts expected it to continue at that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Manufacturing production and employment grew 
moderately, consumer and business spending increased modestly, and construction and real estate activity was flat. 
Wages and prices rose modestly and financial conditions were little changed. Greater-than-usual precipitation slowed 
the agricultural harvest and reduced the quantity and quality of crops. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a moderate pace over 
the reporting period, though contacts expected gains to 
slow to a modest rate over the next 6 to 12 months. 
Hiring was focused on production, sales, and profession-
al and technical workers. As they have for some time, 
contacts indicated that the labor market was tight and 
that they had difficulty filling positions at all skill levels. 
Residential and commercial construction contacts said 
that a lack of workers was slowing the completion of 
projects: One contact reported a delay of 6 weeks be-
cause they couldn’t find an elevator installer. Most con-
tacts indicated that increased US and foreign tariffs had 
not affected their employment levels. Wage growth 
remained modest overall, with wage increases most 
likely for managerial, professional and technical, and 
administrative workers. In addition, numerous manufac-
turing contacts reported raising wages for entry-level 
production workers. Many firms reported rising benefits 
costs, though the number of firms reporting such in-
creases declined from the previous reporting period. 
Prices 
Prices rose modestly in late August and September, and 
contacts expected prices to continue to increase at that 
rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail prices in-
creased slightly overall, though prices of groceries were 
flat. Retail contacts across numerous sectors indicated 
that they expected consumers to see the impact of US 
tariffs on imports by early 2019. Producer prices again 
rose moderately, reflecting in part the pass-through of 
higher labor, materials, energy, and freight costs. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Nonauto retail sales rose moderately, with 
gains in the furniture, appliances, hardware, electronics, 
apparel, hardware, lawn and garden, and hobby sectors, 
and slight declines in the grocery and jewelry sectors. 
Contacts in western Michigan reported rising hotel occu-
pancy rates and airport traffic. Overall, respondents were 
pleased with back-to-school sales and expected good 
holiday season results as well. The rates of both new 
and used vehicles sales were unchanged on balance. 
Leasing activity slowed some. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in late August 
and September. Retail contacts indicated that invento-
ries were generally at comfortable levels. One contact 
noted that retailers were expecting good holiday sales 
and were building up inventories accordingly. Most man-
ufacturing contacts also said stocks were at comfortable 
levels, though some indicated that inventories were too 
low as a result of longer lead times for materials. In 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
addition, stocks at steel service centers remained well 
below historical norms. Capital spending increased 
modestly, and contacts expected growth to continue at 
that pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were 
primarily for replacing industrial and IT equipment and 
for renovating structures. Most contacts indicated that 
higher US and foreign tariffs had not affected their capi-
tal spending schedules; among those who had reacted 
to tariffs, more said that they were slowing spending than 
increasing it. In addition, some contacts indicated that 
they were delaying capital spending decisions until the 
outcomes of trade negotiations were more clear. De-
mand for energy from commercial and industrial users 
increased modestly, with growth led by the manufactur-
ing sector. Demand for transportation services remained 
at a strong level. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was little changed 
on balance over the reporting period. Residential con-
struction was flat, with growth in suburban single-family 
homebuilding offset by declines in other markets. Home-
builders reported that rising labor and materials costs 
continued to slow activity. Home sales declined slightly 
on balance. Contacts indicated that low inventories of 
starter homes continued to hold back sales, and there 
were some concerns that rising interest rates were also 
putting a damper on demand. Home prices and residen-
tial rents increased slightly. Nonresidential construction 
ticked higher, with contacts highlighting growth in the 
office-building sector. Nonresidential construction con-
tacts also reported that rising labor and materials costs 
were slowing growth. Commercial real estate activity 
increased slightly on top of an already strong level, with 
reports of increased demand for for-sale industrial prop-
erties. Commercial rents ticked higher, and vacancy 
rates and the availability of sublease space edged lower. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased at a moderate rate 
in late August and September. Steel output increased 
moderately, led by strong growth in demand from the 
energy sector. Steel imports continued to decline. De-
mand for heavy machinery rose moderately, with growth 
coming from the construction and energy sectors. De-
mand for heavy trucks increased slightly from an already 
strong level. Overall, order books for specialty metals 
manufacturers increased modestly; growth was spread 
across a wide variety of sectors, but was particularly 
strong from the oil and gas sector. Manufacturers of 
construction materials continued to report slow but 
steady increases in shipments. Auto production was flat, 
but remained at a solid level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed over the report-
ing period, which was prior to the recent increase in 
volatility in the stock market. Financial market partici-
pants reported steady securities prices and volatility. 
Business loan demand was flat overall, though contacts 
reported higher demand from the manufacturing, 
healthcare, and warehousing sectors. Competition was 
particularly strong for small business loans. Loan quality 
and lending standards were little changed. Consumer 
loan demand was flat overall, though contacts reported a 
slight increase in demand for mortgage loans. Loan 
quality and lending standards edged up. 
Agriculture 
Greater-than-usual precipitation slowed the harvest and 
reduced the quantity and quality of crops, and expecta-
tions for net crop income fell accordingly. While expecta-
tions for yields were lower than in the prior reporting 
period, it was still likely that they would reach record 
levels. Contacts reported a notable drop in Chinese 
purchases of US soybeans following an increase in 
Chinese tariffs. Farmers also faced higher transportation 
costs due to rail issues, a shortage of truck drivers, and 
complications in shifting export destinations away from 
China. Contacts expected the record yields and weak 
export demand to push crop storage to abnormally high 
levels. Hog and dairy prices recovered some, boosted in 
part by US government purchases that were part of a 
program to compensate farmers for losses from higher 
foreign tariffs. Even so, dairy farmers continued to strug-
gle. In addition, contacts viewed gains from the new US-
Mexico-Canada Agreement as too small and too far in 
the future to help dairy farmers. Moreover, Canada and 
Mexico maintained their tariffs on agricultural goods 
(including pork and dairy) that they imposed in response 
to US steel and aluminum tariffs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions in the District have improved slightly since our previous report. Firms reported slight increases in 
employment and modest growth in wages. Price pressures have increased modestly primarily due to higher transporta-
tion costs. Reports from consumer spending contacts remained mixed. Manufacturers reported modest growth with 
increases in production and new orders. Residential real estate activity improved slightly while construction activity 
declined slightly. Commercial real estate markets were somewhat weaker than in previous reports. District bankers 
reported that loan volumes remain healthy but the rate of growth continues to slow. Agriculture and natural resources 
conditions have improved slightly since the previous report.   
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased slightly since the previous 
report. Manufacturing employment grew modestly. Con-
tacts in Arkansas reported slight growth while contacts in 
Missouri reported modest growth. Transportation em-
ployment also increased, as multiple distribution centers 
announced expansions. However, firms continued to 
report challenges attracting workers. Contacts in Mem-
phis and Arkansas in particular noted difficulties filling 
high-wage, technical positions. Firms continued to use a 
variety of strategies, such as business partnerships and 
non-wage benefits, to recruit employees. One contact 
reported the launch of programs that teach foreign-born 
workers English to prepare them for jobs in the medical 
field and in manufacturing. 
Wages have increased modestly since the previous 
report. Multiple contacts reported wage increases for 
entry-level workers. Furthermore, wages grew in manu-
facturing and trucking sectors and were generally flat in 
the hospitality sector. Wages for small business in St. 
Louis rose slightly. 
Prices  
Price pressures have increased modestly since the 
previous report. Business contacts across the District 
reported moderate growth in fuel costs, contributing to 
rising trucking and transportation costs. A Louisville 
contact noted seeing an increase in rail prices. Coal 
prices in the region have increased moderately. Mean-
while, steel prices decreased slightly but remain elevated 
compared with a year ago. 
Agricultural commodity prices were mixed. Prices for 
cotton and rice have decreased slightly since the previ-
ous report while still remaining slightly above their price 
last year. Corn and soybean prices have increased 
slightly since the end of August. Wheat prices showed 
next to no change over the same time frame, but are up 
25 percent from last year. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate mixed consumer spending activity. Real 
sales tax collections increased in Arkansas, Tennessee, 
and Kentucky relative to a year ago and decreased in 
Missouri. Louisville auto dealers reported that sales 
decreased year over year, and they indicate that higher 
interest rates may be affecting their business. Hospitality 
contacts in Missouri reported that sales were lower com-
pared with the same time last year. They also expressed 
a pessimistic outlook for the remainder of 2018. Arkan-
sas tourism sales tax revenue slightly increased year 
over year.  
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased modestly since our 
previous report. Survey-based indexes indicate that 
Arkansas and Missouri manufacturing activity continued 
to expand from August to September but at a slower 
pace than in the prior month. New orders and production 
also increased in both states. Several firms across a 
variety of industries reported facility expansion and hiring 
plans, including manufacturers of paper products, auto-
motive parts, and primary metals.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector has improved modestly 
since the previous report. The number of posted vacan-
cies for nonfinancial services occupations increased in 
September in Louisville, Memphis, and St. Louis. The 
transportation sector continues to exhibit strong growth 
with higher demand for rail traffic and increased invest-
ment in delivery and fulfillment centers. However, growth 
is somewhat constrained by increased freight and fuel 
costs. The trucking industry’s shortage in drivers is fur-
ther compounded by limitations on driving hours for 
current drivers. Firms in the healthcare industry are 
reporting higher demand for services and increased 
investment in hospitals.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has improved slightly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales for August were mixed across the District’s four 
largest MSAs but were relatively flat overall. Inventory 
levels remained low.  
Residential construction activity has declined slightly 
since the previous report. August permit activity de-
creased modestly across the District’s MSAs. However, 
St. Louis builders reported an optimistic outlook for the 
rest of the year because of robust demand for single-
family homes.  
Commercial real estate activity has declined slightly 
since the previous report. Louisville contacts reported 
decreased activity in office and retail property markets, 
and they noted that demand for office space has been 
relatively stagnant.  
Commercial construction activity has decreased slightly 
since the previous report. August multifamily permits 
were unchanged relative to the previous month in most 
of the District’s MSAs. However, Louisville contacts 
reported a robust level of new construction underway for 
multifamily property types. They also indicated that there 
is a lack of new construction projects for warehouses. 
 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have improved moder-
ately since the previous report. According to a survey of 
small and mid-sized banks, outstanding loan volumes 
grew by 6 percent in the third quarter relative to a year 
ago, which is a slight decrease from the growth rate 
reported in the prior quarter. District loan growth has now 
slowed in seven straight quarters but remains above the 
national rate. Commercial and industrial lending contin-
ued to be robust, growing by 11 percent from one year 
ago. In contrast, residential real estate lending remained 
slow and lagged behind that of the nation for the third 
consecutive quarter. Bankers continued to report slow 
growth in deposits growth. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions improved slightly compared 
with previous reports. Production and yield forecasts 
increased from August to September for corn and soy-
beans. Expected production levels also improved for 
cotton and rice during the same period, but yield fore-
casts decreased. Relative to 2017, District corn, cotton, 
and soybean yields are expected to increase, but rice 
yields are projected to decline. Production levels of all 
four crops are expected to be greater than those from 
last year.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined slightly 
from July to August, with seasonally adjusted coal pro-
duction decreasing 0.6 percent. August coal production 
was 1.4 percent higher than a year ago. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew moderately overall since the last report. Employment grew moderately, with strong 
hiring demand but tight labor supply. Wage and price pressures were both moderate. The District economy showed 
growth in manufacturing, real estate, residential construction, professional services, consumer spending, and tourism. 
But commercial construction and energy slowed, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report 
despite continued labor constraints. Hiring demand was 
robust. Ad hoc surveys of human resources 
professionals in Minnesota and Montana, conducted by 
the Minneapolis Fed in mid-September, found that a 
large majority of respondents’ firms were currently hiring; 
roughly 40 percent said their firms were hiring both to 
add headcount and to replace worker turnover. Data 
from state workforce centers showed that job postings 
were up 9 percent across Ninth District states. Job 
tracking by a Minnesota trade group also showed strong 
growth in STEM jobs in September compared with a 
year earlier. Seasonal hiring was also beginning, with 
several announcements of major hiring, including 1,700 
workers across the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro for a 
transportation firm. However, tight labor supply 
restrained overall hiring. In Montana and Minnesota, the 
number of job openings at workforce centers in August 
outnumbered those seeking work by a roughly two-to-
one margin. Over the most recent six-week period 
(through late September), initial unemployment claims in 
the District dropped by 10 percent over the comparable 
2017 period, and continuing claims were 12 percent 
lower. However, an external survey of fourth quarter 
hiring expectations was notably softer, but still positive, 
for District states, and the percentage of employers 
expecting to increase staff levels fell virtually across the 
board compared with last quarter and last year. 
Wage pressures were moderate since the last report. 
The aforementioned survey of human resources 
professionals found that 40 percent of Minnesota 
respondents reported wage growth of 3 percent or more 
at their firms over the past 12 months, while 25 percent 
of Montana firms responded similarly. Wage 
expectations in both states for the coming 12 months 
were slightly higher. A general business survey, 
conducted by the Minneapolis Fed in October, found that 
a strong majority of firms raised wages relative to a year 
earlier, and future increases were also expected. South 
Dakota retailers reported only modest wage increases 
despite reports of very tight labor. Two Minnesota 
sources also reported that higher wages have allowed 
some workers to cut back on hours worked .   
Prices  
Price pressures increased moderately relative to the 
previous report. A Minneapolis Fed business survey 
indicated that firms had increased prices in the third 
quarter relative to a year ago; two-thirds planned price 
increases in the last quarter of 2018. In a separate 
survey, 60 percent of South Dakota retailers indicated 
that customer prices rose by less than 2 percent but that 
wholesale price increases were larger. Retail fuel prices 
in District states as of early October were moderately 
higher than a month earlier. Numerous manufacturers 
reported that rising prices for certain raw material inputs 
due to trade conflicts were partially passing through to 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
final output prices. Prices received by farmers for corn, 
wheat, hay, and eggs increased in August compared 
with a year earlier; prices for soybeans, hogs, cattle, 
milk, and turkeys decreased.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending grew moderately since the last 
report. Growing activity in the Bakken oil region was 
again spilling into higher retail sales in the region and 
state; North Dakota sales tax collections were 26 percent 
higher than anticipated in August. However, retailers in 
South Dakota reported sluggish late summer sales into 
September. Tourism activity also grew. A survey of 
Minnesota lodging properties described a “strong” 
summer, with about 50 percent of respondents seeing 
higher revenue compared with about 25 percent that saw 
lower revenue. Expectations for fourth quarter tourism 
were positive, but more modest. Minnesota hotel 
demand in August increased by 3 percent over a year 
earlier; occupancy rates were unchanged, but increases 
were seen in average daily rates and revenue per 
available room. However, a late-summer drop in national 
park visitors suggested some slowness in Montana and 
South Dakota, which hold a majority of the District’s 
larger national parks. Visits to the District’s northeastern 
region saw healthy increases.  
Professional Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. Several contacts in 
insurance and financial services indicated that demand 
was up moderately. A construction engineering firm was 
expanding in Minnesota and the Dakotas. Contacts in 
agricultural transportation reported that the year through 
September had been strong, but there was much more 
uncertainty heading into a new marketing year.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction activity contracted slightly since 
the last report. Industry data suggested that commercial 
construction was down in August across much of the 
District compared with a year earlier. Other industry data 
showed that both new projects and total active 
construction projects near the end of September were 
modestly lower than at this time last year. Commercial 
permitting in September was mixed among the District’s 
larger markets. Residential construction activity was 
moderately higher. September single-family permitting 
was higher in a majority of District metros compared with 
a year earlier, and some locations continued to see 
strong multifamily permitting, including Rochester, Minn.  
Commercial real estate saw modest growth since the 
last report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, demand for industrial 
space continued to show strength, with vacancy rates 
falling slightly from already low levels and despite 
significant new construction. Office vacancy rates and 
asking rents were generally stable there as well, while 
sales of office space have been trending upward and 
were expected to continue to rise in the fourth quarter. 
Despite a strong increase in new units, multifamily 
vacancy rates in Minneapolis-St. Paul remained low. 
Apartment occupancy rates were also strong in western 
North Dakota, thanks to increased activity in the Bakken 
oil region. Residential real estate activity fell. Closed 
sales in September were lower compared with a year 
earlier in many of the District’s larger markets.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased slightly. An 
index of manufacturing conditions indicated increased 
activity in September compared with a month earlier in 
Minnesota and North Dakota; the index for South Dakota 
indicated flat activity. Numerous manufacturers across 
the District reported strong output demand and 
production so far this year, but their outlook for the 
remainder of this year and for next was flat due to rising 
input costs and uncertainty over trade policy. A producer 
of industrial and mechanical equipment said recent 
demand and production were up moderately. A solar 
panel plant opened in Minnesota, and a producer of 
composite structural members was expanding a plant.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak overall. 
Persistent rain in early fall delayed or slowed harvests in 
some areas. Very strong harvests were expected around 
the District, including potential record yields in some 
cases. However, commodity prices remained weak, and 
greater production was not expected to completely offset 
the negative impact of low prices on farm incomes. 
International demand for crops, particularly soybeans, 
has fallen dramatically, according to contacts. A 
producer of dry beans reported that a large regular 
annual order from European Union countries was 
cancelled due to tariffs. A substantial number of dairy 
operations have exited the business since the beginning 
of the year. District oil and gas exploration activity as of 
early October decreased slightly from the previous 
report. District iron ore mines were operating at capacity. 
Contacts in nonferrous mining described activity as up 
slightly. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District increased at a moderate pace in September and early October. Consumer spend-
ing rose moderately, with contacts in the retail, auto, and tourism sectors noting higher sales than the previous survey 
period. Manufacturing activity continued to grow moderately, while contacts in the wholesale trade, transportation, and 
professional and high-tech sectors reported strong sales. Residential real estate sales continued to decline moderately, 
and expectations were for additional declines due in part to seasonal factors and higher interest rates. Commercial real 
estate activity expanded modestly. Energy activity accelerated, especially for oil, and additional gains were anticipated. 
Despite higher livestock prices, the outlook for District farm income remained subdued due to low crop prices. District 
employment was mixed across industries, and the majority of respondents reported labor shortages for both entry-level 
and skilled positions. Wage growth accelerated, and strong wage growth was anticipated in the coming months. Price 
gains also picked up, although growth in input prices generally outpaced that of selling prices.  
Employment and Wages  
District employment was mixed across industries since 
the previous survey, but contacts from most sectors 
reported rising employee hours. Contacts in the retail 
trade, wholesale trade, real estate, and energy sectors 
noted increasing employment levels, while those in the 
auto sales, restaurant, and tourism sectors reported a 
decline. Employee hours declined modestly in the health 
services and restaurant sectors, but were steady-to-
increasing for all other reporting industries. Employment 
levels and employee hours were expected to rise mod-
estly in the months ahead.  
The majority of respondents noted labor shortages for 
both entry-level and skilled positions, including shortages 
for retail sales, kitchen staff, specialized IT, commercial 
drivers and skilled mechanics. Wage growth accelerated 
since the previous survey, with wages rising moderately 
in most sectors and strong growth anticipated in the 
coming months.   
Prices  
Input prices were moderately higher in September and 
early October, and selling prices rose modestly. In the 
retail sector, input and selling prices increased robustly 
compared to both the previous survey period and year-
ago levels, and expectations were for similar gains in the 
months ahead. Restaurant contacts noted slight gains in 
selling and input prices since the previous survey period, 
but both were strongly above year-ago levels. Input 
prices rose strongly in the transportation sector, while 
selling prices increased modestly. Manufacturers report-
ed modest price growth for finished products and moder-
ately higher prices for raw materials. Most manufacturing 
contacts continued to note that recent trade develop-
ments had led to higher input prices. Respondents in the 
restaurant, transportation, and manufacturing sectors 
expected moderate growth in selling and input prices in 
the months ahead.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending rose moderately, led by gains in 
retail sales, and contacts expected slight increases in the 
coming months. Retail sales expanded robustly com-
pared to the previous survey period, and contacts antici-
pated sales to grow at a modest pace in the months 
ahead. Respondents noted household furniture sold well, 
while higher-priced items sold poorly. Auto sales contin-
ued to grow modestly, and contacts expected both sales 
and inventories to rise moderately in the coming months. 
Restaurant sales fell modestly compared to the previous 
survey period, but remained well above year-ago levels. 
Restaurant contacts anticipated sales to decline slightly 
in the next few months. Tourism sales increased slightly, 
however contacts projected a slight decline in the 
months ahead.   
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a moder-
ate pace, and other business contacts experienced 
strong sales growth. Factory activity grew at durable 
goods plants due to increases in nonmetallic minerals, 
metals, and electronics, while nondurable plant activity 
slowed slightly. The level of production, shipments, and 
new orders increased slightly over the survey period, 
and each remained higher than year-ago levels. Manu-
facturers expected moderate increases in capital ex-
penditures in the coming months. Many manufacturing 
respondents noted savings due to federal tax cuts, but a 
majority of respondents also noted negative impacts 
from tariffs, primarily due to higher input prices. 
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the wholesale trade, 
transportation, and professional and high-tech sectors 
reported strong sales with expectations for continued 
growth in the months ahead. Professional and high-tech 
firms anticipated capital expenditures to increase slightly 
moving forward, while wholesale trade firms expected 
capital spending to decrease slightly. Transportation 
contacts expected a modest increase in capital spending 
in the coming months, with some contacts attributing this 
increase to recent federal tax cuts.  
Real Estate and Construction  
Overall District real estate activity remained mixed as 
residential real estate activity declined modestly while 
commercial real estate activity rose modestly. Residen-
tial home sales continued to fall moderately, and selling 
prices and inventories of unsold homes grew modestly. 
Respondents expected additional decreases in residen-
tial sales moving forward, citing seasonal factors and 
rising interest rates. Sales of low- and medium-priced 
homes continued to outpace sales of higher-priced 
homes. Residential construction activity strengthened 
slightly since the previous survey period, and construc-
tion supply contacts expected sales to expand further in 
the months ahead. Activity in the commercial real estate 
sector continued to increase at a modest pace as sales, 
absorption, completions, and prices rose. However, a 
majority of respondents reported higher commercial 
vacancy rates for the first time since the end of 2016.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banking 
Bankers reported a modest increase in overall loan 
demand in September and early October. Respondents 
reported a modest increase for commercial and industrial 
loans and a slight increase for commercial real estate 
and agricultural loans. Bankers indicated a slight de-
crease for consumer installment loans, while the volume 
of residential real estate loans remained steady. Loan 
quality improved modestly compared to a year ago, and 
respondents expected loan quality to improve slightly 
over the next six months. Credit standards remained 
largely unchanged in all major loan categories. Overall, 
bankers reported a slight increase in deposit levels.   
Energy 
District energy activity accelerated since the last survey 
period, and contacts expected additional growth moving 
forward. The number of active oil rigs increased slightly, 
while the number of active gas rigs inched down. Oil 
prices rose, recovering somewhat after a slight dip last 
month. The majority of contacts have not been affected 
by price differentials between WTI Midland and Cushing, 
although some contacts noted a slight negative impact 
on oil production. Despite a glut of natural gas, contacts 
did not expect production to slow given the construction 
of additional pipelines which should increase future 
supply capacity. Increased U.S. exports of liquefied 
natural gas was viewed positively by a majority of re-
spondents.  
Agriculture 
The farm economy in the Tenth District remained weak 
as expectations of increased production contributed to a 
slight decline in corn and soybean prices since the previ-
ous reporting period. Corn and soybean production was 
expected to be strong in Nebraska, which could offset 
some adverse effects of low prices. Crop yields in Mis-
souri, however, weakened considerably from a year ago 
and could further strain farm income. The price of wheat 
was down slightly from the previous reporting period, but 
remained higher than a year ago. In the livestock sector, 
the price of cattle increased slightly from the previous 
period, but remained lower than a year ago as invento-
ries generally remained high. In contrast to the prices of 
other agricultural commodities in the District, hog prices 
increased sharply in September due to expectations of 
lower production and higher exports.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Solid expansion continued in the Eleventh District economy. Manufacturing output increased robustly, although demand 
growth slowed from last period. Healthy growth continued in retail and nonfinancial services. Loan demand and volumes 
increased further, as did loan pricing. Home sales were flat to up over the past six weeks. Drilling activity was flat as 
limited pipeline and transportation capacity inhibited growth. Employment increased, and widespread labor shortages 
continued to pressure wages and even restrain business growth in some sectors. Price pressures stayed elevated, 
partly due to tariffs driving up input costs. Outlooks remained optimistic despite increased uncertainty stemming from 
trade disputes, rising interest rates, and labor constraints. 
Employment and Wages  
Widespread job growth continued across sectors. How-
ever, labor markets remained very tight, with most con-
tacts reporting difficulty hiring and several saying the 
lack of qualified candidates was impeding growth. While 
labor shortages spanned most sectors and all skill levels, 
contacts reported the greatest prevalence in mid-skilled 
positions such as blue collar workers in manufacturing, 
construction, and energy, as well as truck drivers. Short-
ages were also cited for low-skill workers in the food 
service industry and high-skill workers in utilities, tele-
communications, and business and financial services. A 
few contacts noted labor poaching was a real issue, 
especially energy sector firms reaching out to workers in 
manufacturing and retail. A staffing services contact 
voiced concern over an extreme shortage of qualified 
bilingual candidates, particularly for areas like customer 
service, call centers, accounting, and business develop-
ment. 
Upward wage pressure was generally pervasive and 
strong, according to contacts. Some businesses were 
implementing non-wage strategies to recruit and retain 
workers, such as giving sizeable signing bonuses, offer-
ing part-time and/or flexible work schedules, and keeping 
employees on the payroll during periods of slower busi-
ness. Also, a staffing firm reported that employers were 
willing to accept candidates that met only 60 percent of 
the qualifications rather than the usual 80 percent. 
Prices 
Price pressures remained elevated in part due to tariffs, 
particularly in manufacturing and retail. Among manufac-
turers, roughly 60 percent of contacts said the tariffs 
announced and/or implemented this year have resulted 
in increased input costs. The share was even higher 
among retailers, at 70 percent. Several contacts noted 
lower profit margins resulting from not being able to raise 
selling prices enough to offset the full cost hikes. Aside 
from tariffs, some services firms said they have raised 
their prices to offset wage increases. Construction con-
tacts continued to report high and/or rising material 
costs. Oil and gas support services firms said input costs 
rose at a faster pace in the third quarter than in the sec-
ond and at a faster pace than they were able to raise the 
prices they charge. 
Manufacturing  
Robust output growth continued in the manufacturing 
sector, although there were some signs that the expan-
sion was moderating somewhat. Demand growth slowed 
in September, particularly for nondurables manufacturing 
such as chemicals. Labor constraints were reported as a 
damping factor, as were tariffs. In a September survey 
conducted by the Dallas Fed, nearly half of the 110 
Texas manufacturing executives responding said the net 
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
impact on their firm of the tariffs announced and/or im-
plemented by the U.S. and other countries is negative, 
while 9 percent said the impact is positive. The most 
common tariff effects were increased uncertainty, rising 
costs, longer supplier delivery times, and reduced pro-
duction. Even still, manufacturers reported positive busi-
ness conditions overall, and outlooks remained optimis-
tic. 
Retail Sales 
Retail sales at Texas stores continued to expand solidly 
during the reporting period, while companywide and 
online sales growth abated somewhat. Some contacts, 
particularly auto dealers, noted that tariffs are prompting 
uncertainty. A contact noted that an online retail competi-
tor has driven some retailers to shift their business mod-
el to remain competitive, such as offering in-store 
pickups for online orders and price matching. Retail 
contacts were notably more optimistic in their outlooks 
than they have been all year. 
Nonfinancial Services 
The nonfinancial services sector continued to expand 
robustly, with revenue growth led by transportation ser-
vices and administrative and support services. Revenue 
growth accelerated in professional, scientific, and tech-
nical services but remained lackluster in leisure and 
hospitality. Most staffing firms reported surging demand 
for their services over the reporting period, noting 
strength in all markets, both geographically and by in-
dustry. There was some concern about potential effects 
of rising interest rates, and roughly half of the 212 Texas 
general services firms responding to a recent Dallas Fed 
survey said tariffs were driving up uncertainty. However, 
outlooks were largely optimistic—even more so than 
during the last reporting cycle—and several contacts 
said they expect strong demand to keep up through 
yearend and into 2019. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales were flat to up over the past six weeks, with 
continued strength noted at lower price points. Home 
prices were flat, and builders said it remained difficult to 
pass through notably higher construction costs. Rising 
interest rates and building costs were among top con-
cerns in the single-family housing market. Apartment 
demand exceeded expectations in most major metros in 
Texas during the third quarter, pushing up occupancy 
and rents slightly. 
Financial Services 
Loan demand growth remained strong over the reporting 
period, while growth in actual loan volumes eased slight-
ly. The deceleration was most pronounced for residential 
real estate and commercial/industrial loan volumes, 
while consumer loan volumes actually grew at a faster 
pace over the past six weeks. Loan pricing continued to 
rise as did banks’ cost of funds. Deposit volumes ex-
panded, albeit at a slower pace, with many contacts 
reporting an increase in competition for deposits. Con-
tacts continued to be optimistic about future economic 
activity and loan demand, however uncertainty in tariff 
and trade negotiations and a flattening yield curve were 
cited as top concerns. 
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District was flat over the 
past six weeks as pipeline capacity constraints continued 
to put downward pressure on prices received by oil and 
gas operators in the Permian Basin. The lower prices 
and transportation constraints have restrained growth in 
rig counts and pushed down demand for some produc-
tion-related oilfield services. Overall, outlooks remained 
positive as additional pipeline capacity is expected to be 
operational by late 2019 or 2020. 
Agriculture 
Drought conditions improved remarkably over the report-
ing period thanks to ample precipitation across much of 
the district. While increased soil moisture will be a boon 
to the winter wheat crop, the rain came too late to help 
the 2018 row crops for which yields are expected to be 
down notably from last year. In fact, wet fields have to 
some extent hampered the harvesting efforts underway 
and could potentially cause quality issues for cotton. On 
the livestock side, conditions remained favorable with 
rising cattle prices, lower feed costs, and strong demand 
for beef. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of Septem-
ber through early October. Conditions in the labor market tightened noticeably, and wage pressures picked up. Price 
inflation increased moderately. Sales of retail goods picked up slightly, while activity in consumer and business services 
was solid. Activity in the manufacturing sector expanded moderately, and conditions in agriculture improved somewhat. 
Contacts reported that residential and commercial real estate market activity expanded at a strong pace. Lending activi-
ty picked up moderately. 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market tightened noticeably, with 
contacts across the District experiencing continued hiring 
challenges due to labor shortages. Manufacturers in 
Oregon noted difficulty hiring entry-level production 
workers, and employment growth fell short of firms’ 
expectations. Shortages of skilled loan officers limited 
hiring at several rural community banks. A contact in the 
California banking industry observed that an uptick in 
mergers resulted in a modest decline in employment as 
the banks involved resolved job redundancies. A major 
shipping and logistics business in Northern California 
reported strong employment growth due to recent and 
anticipated increases in demand for its services.   
Wage growth picked up broadly. Contacts across the 
District noted continued upward compensation pressures 
for a variety of skilled occupations, including finance 
professionals, health-care providers, and business con-
sultants. A contact in the retail industry raised starting 
wages in anticipation of intensifying labor shortages 
during the holiday season. A few contacts noted that 
some businesses increased benefits like vacation allow-
ances and onetime bonuses rather than wages. 
Prices  
Price inflation increased moderately over the reporting 
period. Several contacts noted a moderate pickup in 
price growth for metal inputs due mostly to the continued 
impact of tariffs. Rising energy costs resulted in pricing 
pressures for transportation services and petroleum-
based inputs to construction and manufacturing. Final 
prices at quick service restaurants increased somewhat. 
A contact in the hospitality industry in Southern Califor-
nia reported that many hotels were passing along higher 
labor and input costs to guests in the form of one-off 
surcharges. Pricing pressures in the agriculture markets 
across the District were mixed, but flat on balance. Lum-
ber prices continued to decline due to a softening in 
construction starts in some regions.         
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods picked up slightly over the reporting 
period. Demand at home improvement stores increased 
moderately, although the building materials segment 
exhibited modest weakness. E-commerce retail sales 
grew somewhat, reflecting gains in consumer confi-
dence. A major quick service restaurant chain based in 
Washington reported that in-store traffic was down slight-
ly.   
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
was solid. In Washington, demand for health-care ser-
vices grew noticeably in urban areas, due in part to an 
increase in hiring at businesses with health benefits. A 
contact in the shipping and logistics industry noted an 
increase in demand for freight services, especially from 
small businesses. A contact in Southern California re-
The Beige Book ■ October 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
ported an uptick in demand for technology consulting 
services. Contacts in the hospitality industry noted that 
hotel bookings for leisure guests were solid, and discre-
tionary on-site spending grew. However, business reser-
vations declined somewhat on a year-over-year basis.   
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector expanded moderate-
ly. Industry contacts reported that demand for construc-
tion equipment was solid, though producers were atten-
tive to indications of a moderation in some real estate 
markets. Contacts in Northern California reported that 
sales of semiconductors were brisk, driven in part by 
strong global demand. Deliveries of commercial aircraft 
were essentially flat from the same period last year, 
while new orders grew noticeably.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector improved somewhat, 
with crop yields generally beating expectations. Howev-
er, most contacts reported that trade policy changes 
started to have a tangible impact on activity. Yields and 
profits for growers in Central California continued to be 
satisfactory, but inventories of certain exported crops 
increased after delivery schedules were delayed due to 
trade policy uncertainty. Forward contracts for heavily 
exported crops declined. Wheat and fruit growers in 
Washington observed a slight tick down in demand, 
which some attributed to growing trade tensions. A con-
tact in Oregon noted that sales of raw lumber to large 
building companies continued to decline at a gradual 
pace, while demand for processed wood products was 
solid.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets expanded at a strong 
pace. Overall, contacts reported that robust demand for 
housing outpaced the supply of homes, which continued 
to be constrained by shortages of labor and high material 
costs. In particular, inventory levels of more affordable 
homes remained low, while demand in this market seg-
ment picked up further, putting upward pressure on 
prices. Contacts noted that a further increase in mort-
gage rates had only a slight moderating impact on de-
mand.  
Commercial real estate activity was robust. Construction 
activity was solid, especially for industrial and warehouse 
spaces. A contact in Southern California noted that rents 
and occupancy rates increased. In Oregon, commercial 
activity expanded in rural areas with lower land costs 
and rents. Demand for retail spaces at malls declined 
somewhat, resulting in lower occupancy rates.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity picked up moderately over the reporting 
period. Loan demand increased overall. Profitability and 
net interest margins improved noticeably as increases to 
lending rates outpaced those for deposit rates. Credit 
quality continued to be strong. Contacts at credit unions 
reported an increase in membership. ■ 


