The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
May 31, 2017 
May 2017 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
based on information collected on or before May 22, 2017. This docu-
ment summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Most of the twelve Federal Reserve Districts reported that their economies continued to expand at a modest or moder-
ate pace from early April through late May. Boston and Chicago signaled that growth in their Districts had slowed 
somewhat to a modest pace since the prior Beige Book period, while New York indicated that activity had flattened out. 
Consumer spending softened with many Districts noting little or no change in nonauto retail sales, while auto sales 
have edged down from last year’s record highs in several Districts; tourism activity has continued to keep pace with the 
general economy. Meanwhile, the majority of Districts continued to report moderate growth in manufacturing activity 
and in most nonfinancial service sectors. Construction of new homes and nonresidential structures also continued to 
grow at modest to moderate rates, as did sales of existing homes; nonresidential leasing picked up a bit. Lending vol-
ume trends tended to mirror (and support) the general activity of the economy. Agricultural conditions remained mixed 
with some regions negatively affected by unusually wet weather. Most energy sectors tended to modestly improve. A 
majority of Districts reported that firms expressed positive near-term outlooks; however, optimism waned somewhat in 
a few Districts. 
Employment and Wages 
Labor markets continued to tighten, with most Districts citing shortages across a broadening range of occupations and 
regions. Despite supply constraints impeding the ability of firms to attract and retain qualified workers, most Districts 
reported that employment continued to grow at a modest to moderate pace. Similarly, most firms across the Districts 
noted little change to the recent trend of modest to moderate wage growth, although many firms reported offering high-
er wages to attract workers where shortages were most severe. A manufacturing firm in the Chicago District reported 
attracting better applicants and improving retention for its unskilled workforce by raising wages 10 percent. 
Prices 
On balance, pricing pressures were little changed from the prior report, with most Districts reporting modest increases. 
Rapidly rising costs for lumber, steel, and other commodities tended to push input costs higher for some manufacturers 
and the construction sector. In contrast, some Districts noted falling prices for certain final goods, including groceries, 
apparel, and autos. Energy prices and farm prices were mixed across products and among Districts. Low inventories of 
for-sale homes were pushing house prices higher in many markets. 
Boston 
Overall, economic growth was modest, with only one-half 
of retail and manufacturing contacts reporting year-over-
year gains in revenue. Housing markets were strong 
despite low inventories. Labor markets remained tight, 
with employers facing limited supply. Price pressures 
continued to be modest. The outlook remained positive, 
with a bit of added caution. 
New York 
Economic activity has flattened out in recent weeks. 
Labor markets remained tight, and wages for skilled 
workers have continued to grow moderately. Input cost 
pressures have remained fairly widespread, while selling 
prices have increased at a modest pace. Housing mar-
kets have been steady, on balance, while commercial 
real estate markets have been mixed. 
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Overall, economic activity continued to rise modestly. 
The pace of nonresidential construction and existing 
homes sales ticked up, while nonfinancial services 
slowed. On balance, employment, wages, and prices 
continued to grow modestly; however, wage pressures 
were noted in some regions and for some occupations 
— relieved at times by substituting capital for labor. 
Cleveland 
Business activity generally expanded at a moderate 
pace. Labor markets tightened, with employers looking 
to enhance benefits packages as a means of employee 
retention. Single-family home sales picked up after slow-
ing early in the first quarter. Motor vehicle production 
was down slightly, while orders for heavy equipment 
rose. Businesses reported increasing selling prices more 
frequently due to rising input costs. 
Richmond 
Economic activity expanded modestly across a wide 
array of industries, and firms continued to add workers to 
their payrolls. However, labor shortages persisted in 
most areas, keeping upward pressure on wages, while 
hindering growth in some industries. The hard-hit coal 
industry was recently buoyed by supply constraints in 
Australia, where adverse weather temporarily idled coal 
production facilities. 
Atlanta 
Economic activity modestly improved. The labor market 
remained tight. Firms noted use of training programs to 
attract and retain workers. An uptick in wage growth was 
reported for high-demand positions. Retail sales were 
soft, however, sales of trucks and large vehicles re-
mained solid. Manufacturers noted increases in new 
orders and production. 
Chicago 
Growth slowed to a modest pace. Employment, business 
spending, and manufacturing production grew at a mod-
erate rate, while construction and real estate grew mod-
estly and consumer spending decreased slightly. Prices 
rose modestly. Conditions were little changed in the 
financial and agricultural sectors. 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic activity has continued to increase at a modest 
pace, and contacts continue to hold a generally optimis-
tic outlook for overall activity for the remainder of 2017. 
Reports from auto dealers, however, indicate slowing 
sales since our previous report; they expect this down-
ward trend to continue into the third quarter. 
Minneapolis 
Economic activity grew modestly. The professional ser-
vices, residential construction, manufacturing, energy, 
and mining sectors saw growth, while commercial and 
residential real estate activity declined slightly. Commer-
cial construction increased in some regions but was flat 
in others and slower in segments outside of multifamily 
building. Employment and wages both saw moderate 
growth. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity increased moderately. Manufacturing 
and real estate activity expanded at a moderate pace, 
and energy activity continued to increase modestly. 
Consumer spending rose at a modest pace, with a 
strong outlook for future growth. Agricultural conditions 
remained generally weak due to subdued farm income 
and continued low commodity prices. 
Dallas 
Economic activity grew moderately, and outlooks re-
mained positive. Retail sales accelerated slightly, despite 
some softness in auto sales. The energy sector saw 
further improvement, partly supporting output growth in 
manufacturing. Home sales continued to trend upward, 
but there was continued softness at the higher end. 
Nonfinancial services activity expanded and loan de-
mand increased. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace. Overall, price inflation was steady. The labor mar-
ket tightened further, and wage pressures grew moder-
ately. Sales of retail goods grew modestly, and growth in 
the consumer and business services sectors remained 
strong. Manufacturing activity picked up to a modest 
pace. Activity in the real estate sector remained strong. 
Lending activity grew moderately. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from business contacts in the First District were slightly less positive in mid-May than in early April or February. 
The overall pace of growth was modest. Retail contacts were evenly divided between small declines and small increas-
es in sales from a year earlier. One-half of responding manufacturers reported year-over-year revenue gains, but most 
of the others cited decreased sales. With one exception, staffing-firm contacts reported revenue declines, mostly reflect-
ing a dearth of applicants to fill their clients’ positions. Commercial real estate markets were mostly unchanged, with 
stable leasing activity. Residential real estate markets were reportedly strong, despite low inventories. Labor markets 
remained tight, and employers said wage increases were modest to moderate. Firms continued to report that price 
pressures were modest. The outlook generally continued to be positive, although a bit less so than in the last round. 
Employment and Wages  
Respondents in several sectors mentioned tight labor 
markets. None of our manufacturing contacts reported 
any significant hiring moves either up or down. A maker 
of envelopes said that they expected to hire significantly 
in the near future but not right now. Several manufactur-
ing contacts said it was hard to find qualified workers. A 
manufacturer of semiconductors and related goods said 
that they had to raise starting wages to fill vacant posi-
tions in New England. A manufacturer of furniture said 
that retaining new hires was a major challenge as some 
workers quit within days of being hired. Staffing firms 
continued to report strong labor demand and tight labor 
supply. They singled out the following positions as partic-
ularly hard to fill: systems administrator, network engi-
neer, and medical assistant. All contacted staffing firms 
indicated that bill and pay rates had increased.  
Prices  
Price changes remained modest. Retail contacts contin-
ued to report that input and selling prices were steady or 
increased slightly. Manufacturing contacts reported 
modest pricing pressure. An industrial distributor said 
that they had seen vendors successfully increase prices 
for the first time in several years. Otherwise, manufactur-
ing firms reported mixed changes of modest size in input 
and selling prices and no price surprises from vendors. 
Home prices increased, driven by strong buyer demand 
confronting low inventories: Median sales prices of single 
family homes and condominiums increased year-over-
year across the board, with the exception of condos in 
Vermont. With supplies dwindled and demand robust, 
upward pressure on housing prices is expected to persist 
across the First District. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail contacts consulted in mid-May reported that year-
over-year comparable-store sales ranged from low-
single-digit declines to low-single-digit gains. Furniture 
sales were said to have been unexpectedly soft. Other 
retailers attributed some of the weakness in sales to 
decreased customer traffic in brick-and-mortar stores. 
While some contacts said the outlook for the rest of 2017 
is a bit uncertain, most continued to expect that sales will 
end up growing by low single-digit percentages over the 
year.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of the eight firms contacted in mid-May, three reported 
lower sales, one reported flat sales, and the balance 
reported higher sales. Reasons for weakness were 
varied. A firm that makes envelopes attributed flat sales 
to uncertainty among its financial customers about future 
government policy. A chemical firm said greater exports 
from China were putting downward pressure on the price 
of one important chemical and cutting into its internation-
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
al business. A firm that provides veterinary services 
indicated that patient visits were down due to the weath-
er. By contrast, an industrial distributor said that sales 
were up year-on-year in April for the first time in two 
years. A manufacturer of lab equipment reported higher 
sales but said that uncertainty about government policy 
was slowing demand.  
No contacts reported revisions to capital spending plans. 
An aerospace and industrial distribution firm said that 
they had placed a convertible bond last week and there 
was strong demand. 
The outlook was generally positive but cautious. One 
contact said they initially attributed down sales earlier in 
the year to the fact that the relevant comparison period, 
the first quarter of 2016, was exceptionally strong, but 
continued weakness has made them wonder. Several 
contacts expressed concern about policy uncertainty and 
said that was holding back spending.  
Staffing Services 
All of the contacted staffing firms in New England saw 
revenues decline year-over-year for their temporary 
placements, while one respondent saw an overall in-
crease in revenue because of strong activity on the 
permanent placements side of the business. Although 
one firm recently lost a big client and seeks to broaden 
its listings, the revenue declines mostly reflect difficulty 
recruiting applicants. Firms are brainstorming and trying 
new ways to recruit people to fill their clients’ jobs. Two 
firms are spending more money on recruitment. Two 
firms are working with non-profits to find and attract more 
qualified employees. One firm hired an additional internal 
staff member who will focus on social media as a recruit-
ment tool. Two firms raised their referral and signing 
bonuses and one firm will pay college tuition for qualified 
employees to receive a degree related to their job. Look-
ing forward, staffing firms are not as optimistic as they 
were last quarter.  
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate markets were mostly flat in the 
First District in recent weeks. In greater Hartford, office 
leasing remained subdued as foot traffic slowed further. 
In Boston, office leasing activity and vacancy rates were 
said to be stable, but contacts reported that few firms 
outside of the life sciences industry were expanding their 
footprints. Some life sciences firms seeking to add space 
in greater Boston have turned to converting vacant sub-
urban office space into laboratory space. Also in the 
Boston area, office construction remained limited while 
apartment construction has shifted increasingly to the 
suburbs. Commercial real estate activity was also stable 
in Portland, with continued light leasing activity in the 
office market and strong demand from developers for 
vacant industrial space and for the construction of hotels 
and high-end urban condominiums. Contacts across the 
District reported that investment sales demand held 
steady while the supply of commercial properties for sale 
stayed flat or declined and was quite low in absolute 
terms. Most contacts forecasted that market conditions 
would stay the same or improve modestly going forward, 
but the outlook remained less optimistic in Connecticut, 
which has seen flat employment in the past year and 
faces a severe state budget deficit.  
Residential Real Estate 
Residential real estate markets in the First District saw a 
strong start to spring. For single family homes, closed 
sales were up year-over-year from March 2016 to March 
2017 in three of the six First District states, while pend-
ing sales increased year-over-year in every state but 
Rhode Island. For condos, closed sales increased year-
over-year in every state. A contact in Boston reported 
that “March is historically a telling month for how the 
spring market is going; with positive sales numbers we 
experienced last month and buyer demand we’re seeing, 
it’s clear that we’re set for a very busy market.” Low 
inventory continued to present challenges for buyers, 
however, especially those purchasing a home for the first 
time. Inventories fell on a year-over-year basis in every 
state. A Massachusetts contact noted that inventories 
have been at all-time lows for months and said “without 
more inventory, prices will continue to rise and price 
buyers out of the market.” 
Most contacts seemed optimistic about market activity 
and continued strong buyer demand, despite the strains 
on inventory. Many noted that low unemployment has 
helped spur consumer confidence, which contributes to 
the demand for residential real estate. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has been essentially flat since the last report, while labor markets have re-
mained tight. Input price pressures have persisted, while selling prices have been steady to up modestly. Manufacturers 
indicated that business activity has flattened out, while service-sector contacts have continued to report steady to mod-
estly expanding activity. Consumer spending has been flat since the last report, while consumer confidence has retreat-
ed from a multi-year high. Housing markets were mixed but, on balance, steady since the last report. Commercial real 
estate markets were also mixed: office markets were mostly steady, industrial markets were steady to slightly stronger, 
while retail markets weakened further. New construction activity has been sluggish across most of the District, on both 
commercial and residential structures. Banks reported that loan demand was steady to stronger, while delinquency 
rates declined.    
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight. Contacts at em-
ployment agencies characterized the job market as 
steady and fairly tight—especially for engineers and 
other tech workers, but also for skilled workers more 
generally. Two major New York City agencies character-
ized hiring as steady at a moderate level, while an up-
state agency notes some pickup in the second quarter. 
Manufacturers have continued to add jobs in recent 
weeks, and employment is also reported to be on the 
rise among businesses in education & health services, 
transportation, and finance. Businesses in other service 
industries report steady employment levels. Looking 
ahead, firms in manufacturing and most service indus-
tries indicated that they expect employment to rise, on 
balance, in the months ahead.   
Contacts across all service industries reported moderate 
wage growth and expect comparable increases to con-
tinue in the months ahead. Employment agency contacts 
in New York City noted a bit more upward pressure on 
wages and salaries—employers were said to be increas-
ingly negotiable on pay, but mainly for highly sought-
after, skilled, and specialized workers. An upstate New 
York agency indicated that wages have held steady.    
Prices  
Business contacts continued to note rising input costs 
but only modest increases in selling prices. Those in the 
retail, wholesale, transportation, and leisure & hospitality 
industries reported modest increases in selling prices, on 
balance, while businesses in other sectors indicated little 
changed in prices received.  
General merchandise retailers reported that prices have 
been flat, and New York City hotels indicated that room 
rates have held steady. Broadway theaters, in contrast, 
reported that average ticket prices have picked up no-
ticeably in recent weeks and have been running roughly 
15 percent above comparable 2016 levels.   
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported that sales were steady to down mod-
erately. Retailers in upstate New York reported that 
sales have been essentially flat in April and early May. A 
major retail chain noted that same-store sales fell below 
plan and were down from a year earlier in April but have 
picked up somewhat in May. Sales in New York City 
slightly lagged the region overall. Inventories were gen-
erally said to be at desired levels. Retail contacts have 
become somewhat less optimistic about the near-term 
sales outlook.   
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
Auto dealers in upstate New York reported that sales of 
new and used vehicles softened in April and were lower 
than a year earlier—a trend seen continuing into early 
May. One contact noted that inventories of some new, 
mainly domestic, vehicles makes have swelled some-
what, though inventories generally remain at or near 
desired levels. Retail and wholesale credit conditions 
were reported to be in good shape, though there has 
been further tightening for sub-prime auto loans.  
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) retreated in April after reaching a 16-year high in 
March.   
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturers reported that business activity has leveled 
off thus far in the second quarter, following brisk growth 
in the first three months of the year. Businesses in the 
wholesale trade and transportation industries also report-
ed a pause in growth. Looking ahead, however, manu-
facturers remain widely optimistic about the near-term 
outlook, while those in transportation and wholesale 
trade remain somewhat upbeat.   
Services 
Businesses in most service industries noted little change 
in general business activity, while contacts in education 
& health services continued to indicate steady, moderate 
growth. Looking ahead, however, businesses in educa-
tion & health were generally the least sanguine about the 
outlook, while contacts in the information, professional & 
business services, and leisure & hospitality industries 
were fairly optimistic.   
Tourism has picked up somewhat in New York City. 
Broadway theaters reported that business improved 
noticeably in April and the first half of May, with attend-
ance running roughly 10 percent ahead of 2016 levels 
and revenues up more than 25 percent.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, steady since the last report. New York 
City’s rental market has remained mostly steady, though 
increased landlord concessions have further lowered 
effective rents and spurred some pickup in leasing, 
especially at the high end. In contrast, rents continued to 
rise across northern New Jersey, the Lower Hudson 
Valley, southwestern Connecticut and upstate New York.  
The sales market for homes has strengthened in north-
ern New Jersey and across upstate New York but has 
been essentially flat in New York City. Home resale 
activity across downstate New York, and especially in 
New York City, has slowed to more normal levels, follow-
ing an unusually brisk first quarter. Prices of New York 
City co-ops and condos have remained mixed, rising at 
the low end, falling at the high end, and holding steady in 
the middle. Inventories have continued to edge up in 
Manhattan but have fallen to exceptionally low levels 
elsewhere—mostly notably in upstate New York and 
northern New Jersey.  
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed in 
recent weeks. The market for office space has generally 
been steady, as both availability rates and asking rents 
have not changed significantly. The industrial market, 
which had been strengthening steadily over the past 
year, has lost some momentum in recent weeks but has 
continued to tighten. While availability rates have largely 
leveled off, rents have continued to climb, running 8-12 
percent ahead of a year earlier. In contrast, the market 
for retail space has softened further: vacancy rates 
reached multi-year highs throughout the District, while 
asking rents were little changed.   
Finally, both residential and commercial construction 
have remained sluggish overall. New starts of single-
family homes have remained subdued, while new multi-
family construction has slowed substantially. On the 
commercial side, although there is a good deal of office 
construction in progress—especially in New York City—
there has been very little new office development, except 
in northern New Jersey.    
Banking and Finance 
Bankers reported stronger demand for consumer loans 
and residential mortgages but no change in demand for 
commercial loans or mortgages. Bankers also indicated 
that refinancing activity decreased for all types of loans. 
Credit standards were reported to be unchanged across 
all loan categories. Banks noted wider spreads of loan 
rates over cost of funds for consumer loans but no 
change in spreads for other loan categories. Contacts 
also reported an increase in the average deposit rate, on 
net. Delinquency rates were said to be lower across all 
loan categories—particularly residential mortgages.  ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace during the current Beige Book reporting 
period. Manufacturing and homebuilding continued at a moderate pace of growth, but nonfinancial services appear to 
have slowed to a modest pace. Nonresidential construction and existing homes sales picked up a bit, which is echoed 
by changes in loan volumes to those sectors. On balance, employment, wages, and prices continued to grow at a mod-
est pace; however, tight labor markets are reported in some regions and for some occupations. Contacts noted that 
some wage pressures have eased as firms substitute technology for labor. Overall, firms continued to expect moderate 
growth over the next six months. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has continued at a modest pace of growth. 
Manufacturing firms reported increases in employment 
and in the average hours worked compared to the prior 
period. Employment indicators from nonmanufacturing 
firms were mixed, as contacts noted fewer net additions 
to full-time staff, more net additions to part-time staff, 
and little change in hours.  
On balance, wage pressures continue to be muted; 
reports of tight labor markets are scattered by region and 
occupation. Contacts tend to note significant price in-
creases only in association with commodity price hikes 
that are more readily passed through to customers. 
Several contacts from banking and finance noted that 
wage pressures are real and rising but that firms in many 
sectors are using technology whenever possible to sub-
stitute for labor.  
Pennsylvania staffing firms have remained very busy 
since the start of the year. Contacts from staffing firms in 
labor markets with lower unemployment rates have 
noted greater wage pressure, while contacts operating in 
markets with higher unemployment rates report minimal 
wage pressure.  
Prices  
Price pressures appeared to ease a bit, although on 
balance, levels continued to rise modestly. Nearly two-
thirds of firms’ contacts reported no change at all in 
prices paid and prices received. Of the remaining firms, 
more reported increases than decreases, but the differ-
ential has diminished. Homebuilders noted rapidly rising 
lumber costs due to recent tariffs imposed on Canadian 
lumber. Overall, the sales prices of existing homes rose 
modestly, although this varied across markets and price 
categories.  
Looking ahead one year, firms anticipate a 2.25 percent 
increase in prices received for their own goods and 
services — slightly higher than one quarter prior. Firms 
also reported expectations of 2.50 percent annual infla-
tion for consumers — a bit lower than last winter.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturers continued to indicate moder-
ate growth with higher percentages of firms reporting 
increases in current activity and shipments this period 
compared with the prior period. However, new orders 
began to soften late in the current period.  
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
Overall, gains in activity were indicated by many major 
sectors, including the makers of paper products, chemi-
cals, fabricated metal products, and industrial machinery; 
some reductions of new orders and/or shipments were 
noted by the makers of lumber products, primary metal 
products, and electronic products.  
While manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
growth over the next six months, the breadth of optimism 
has narrowed. Less than half of the firms are now ex-
pecting growth — down from two-thirds during the prior 
period. Similarly, the expectations for future employment 
and capital expenditures also softened.   
Consumer Spending 
Nonauto retail contacts noted little sales growth and 
expressed skepticism that rising consumer confidence 
has had a significant, positive impact. In fact, one large 
retailer reported that “if anything, we feel like there has 
been a little pullback from the lower-end consumer.” 
Moreover, retailers noted that consumers are shifting 
their spending somewhat away from goods to dining and 
experiences. That trend, plus the ongoing shift toward 
online sales, continues to hemorrhage sales from brick-
and-mortar stores. One large retailer stated that consum-
er confidence is a leading indicator that should result in 
increased sales but not until the second half of 2017.  
On balance, auto dealers reported flat year-over-year 
sales during the current period: Pennsylvania dealers 
reported that sales were up slightly, while New Jersey 
dealers reported that sales were down slightly relative to 
last year’s high levels. New Jersey contacts did note a 
little pickup in early May. Generally, dealers expect 
another strong year of sales even if a bit below last 
year’s level. Manufacturing incentives are helping to 
sustain sales, but maintaining the same level of profita-
bility is more of a struggle. 
Tourism activity continued to grow at a modest pace, 
according to several contacts. After a slower first quarter, 
several events lifted Philadelphia area hotel and restau-
rant activity to stronger levels. A Delaware shore contact 
noted that bookings and rates are higher than last year 
at hotels representing several price points. Even in At-
lantic City, casino revenues are beginning to eke out 
slight increases on an ongoing year-over-year basis.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Third District service-sector firms reported modest 
growth in general activity — slowing a bit from the mod-
erate pace of the prior period. Most indicators, especially 
new orders, suggested slower growth; however, all were 
representative of a normal pace for the Third District. 
One large service-sector firm noted continued growth of 
its consumer base and improved credit behavior of its 
base; the firm also noted unexpected weakness from 
part of its business-oriented sales. Expectations about 
future growth have also abated since the prior Beige 
Book period but have remained quite positive with nearly 
60 percent of the firms anticipating increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth of overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) after relatively little 
change during the prior Beige Book period. Commercial 
real estate loans, residential mortgages, and auto loans 
contributed the strongest growth in loan volume. Com-
mercial and industrial loan volumes were up slightly, 
while home equity loans were essentially flat. Credit card 
volumes are highly seasonal but have grown over the 
year at a modest rate and grew during this Beige Book 
period at a faster rate than the change observed over the 
same period last year. Banking contacts continued to 
express cautious optimism for slow, steady growth.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders continued to report moderate increases in 
traffic and contract signings and expressed concerns 
that the labor supply will not support higher levels of 
construction activity. A South Jersey builder attributed 
the gains to greater confidence borne of increased jobs 
and income.  
Brokers in most major Third District housing markets 
noted that existing home sales continued to strengthen 
from a slight pace of growth last period to a modest 
increase this period. The spring selling season failed 
again to trigger a significant influx of new inventory. In 
some areas, rental market activity is increasing. Still, 
brokers expect to end the year with somewhat higher 
sales totals than last year.  
Nonresidential real estate contacts covering much of the 
Third District reported modest growth, as the existing 
high levels of construction activity broadened across 
sectors and geographically throughout the region. Over-
all, leasing activity changed little, although contacts 
noted that deals within the Philadelphia office market 
were a bit below expectations until late in the current 
period. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity expanded at a moderate pace in the Fourth District during the reporting period. Labor mar-
kets continued to strengthen, with wage pressure coming from both low- and high-skilled workers. Upward pressure on 
input prices was prevalent in the construction and manufacturing sectors. Firms facing higher input prices frequently 
reported that they were able to raise selling prices and billing rates. Consumer spending at brick-and-mortar establish-
ments rose slightly, while new motor vehicle sales strengthened. Manufacturing activity grew slightly, with a marked 
improvement for heavy equipment producers. Freight volume continued to expand. After slowing early in the first quar-
ter, sales of new and existing single-family homes picked up. Activity in the commercial real estate market remains 
elevated. Credit portfolios grew slightly on balance.  
Employment and Wages  
Payrolls grew across a broad range of industries, with 
continuing wage pressures in some skilled occupations 
and at the lower end of the pay scale. Staffing firms   
noted an increase in the number of job openings and 
placements during the past two months, a situation 
which they attributed to an improving business climate. 
Because of difficulties in attracting and retaining employ-
ees, companies are placing a greater emphasis on ex-
panding benefits and work-life-balance initiatives, while 
at the same time increasing wages and salaries. Banking 
contacts noted significant wage pressure for IT staff and 
compliance personnel. High turnover remains an issue in 
the freight transportation industry. In order to retain 
drivers, one firm increased driver pay by 3 cents per 
mile, equating to a 7.5 percent wage increase. Attracting 
qualified applicants for low-skilled manufacturing jobs is 
difficult, and many newly hired workers prove to be 
unreliable. That said, competition for low-skilled workers 
is strong and is driving up starting wages.  
Prices  
Similar to the previous reporting period, statements 
about rising input costs originated primarily among con-
struction and manufacturing contacts. Building contrac-
tors noted higher material prices across the board, but 
especially for Canadian softwood. Contractors expect a 
dramatic increase in lumber prices unless a tariff agree-
ment is reached. Several contacts reported that con-
struction subcontractors are constrained by a lack of 
qualified workers and are operating at capacity, resulting 
in significantly higher price quotes. Manufacturers point-
ed to rising steel prices as a primary factor driving up 
their input costs. Manufacturers, homebuilders, and 
general building contractors experienced little pushback 
when attempting to raise their selling prices. Freight 
haulers generally reported that their markets were able 
to sustain higher freight rates in the low-single digits. 
Grocery store shelf prices declined slightly.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending at brick-and-mortar retailers rose 
slightly during the period and was attributed to the rollout 
of spring merchandise and promotional activity. Sales of 
household furnishings picked up, while electronics and 
apparel transactions were fairly soft. One chain reported 
that liquidations and accelerated store closures by retail-
ers, who are rationalizing their brick-and-mortar footprint, 
are having an impact on foot traffic at malls. The contact 
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
noted that with more dark stores, the appeal of a mall 
decreases, and this may create a downward spiral. Foot 
traffic in grocery stores was flat. However, one chain 
reported that dollars spent per customer rose, so total 
revenue was up slightly. Year-to-date sales through April 
of new motor vehicles increased 3.5 percent compared 
to those of the year-earlier period. Auto dealers are 
concerned about higher-than-normal inventories and 
credit tightening for subprime buyers. A dealer group 
noted the group’s new vehicle inventory was at its high-
est level since 2004.   
Industrial Production 
Activity in the manufacturing sector picked up slightly 
during the period. Contacts noted rising output by pro-
ducers of heavy equipment sold to other manufacturers. 
This market segment had reported flat to declining or-
ders since the beginning of the past recession. Suppliers 
to the construction and food services industries said that 
demand remains elevated. Demand for consumer pack-
aged products was weaker than expected during the first 
quarter, although demand was above year-ago levels. 
First-quarter motor vehicle production at District plants 
declined when compared to that of the same time period 
a year earlier. Increased light truck production was insuf-
ficient to offset larger declines in car production. Manu-
facturers cited the strong dollar as the primary factor 
tempering offshore sales. A growing number of produc-
ers are increasing capital budgets. There was a notable 
increase in the number of contacts who are allocating 
monies for plant expansion.  
The number of drilling rigs operating in the District con-
tinued to trend higher, albeit at a slow pace. Natural gas 
output remains at historic highs. High levels of coal 
production were maintained because of rising demand 
and reduced customer inventory.  
Real Estate and Construction 
First-quarter unit sales of new and existing single-family 
homes increased almost 4 percent compared to those of 
a year earlier. The average sales price rose 6 percent. 
Homebuilders attributed stronger sales to an improving 
job market and rising prices for buyers’ existing homes. 
Estimates of single-family construction starts during the 
first quarter were much higher in Ohio compared to 
those of a year earlier. Estimated starts in District re-
gions outside Ohio were flat or declining. The strongest 
demand for new homes was found in the move-up and 
high-end price point categories. Purchases by first-time 
buyers declined markedly during the period.   
Activity across the commercial real estate sector remains 
elevated. Increases were reported in transaction volume 
and the average price per square foot for industrial and 
office properties during the first quarter compared to 
prior-year results. Office vacancy rates declined, and 
asking rents increased, although both at a slow pace. 
Nonresidential contractors reported that inquiries and 
backlogs remain strong. The highest demand is for com-
mercial property development, public infrastructure pro-
jects, and education buildings. 
Financial Services 
Bankers reported that their credit portfolios grew slightly 
on balance since the last report. Although customer 
confidence remains high, that confidence has not yet 
translated into additional commercial or retail lending. On 
the commercial side, strongest demand is for CRE loans 
and M&A financing. Contacts expect that the current 
level of activity in these segments will continue. Although 
banks were still experiencing relative strength in auto 
lending and home equity products, several contacts 
noted a small decline in consumer lending overall, espe-
cially for credit cards. Activity in mortgage lending ex-
panded slightly, mainly for new purchases. Contacts 
noted little change in loan application standards and 
delinquency rates.  
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Professional and business services firms generally re-
ported moderate levels of activity during the period. 
Strongest demand was seen by engineering services 
and software and IT services firms. Factors contributing 
to strong demand for software and IT include clients’ 
concerns about cyber security and data protection and a 
transitioning by many companies from owning and man-
aging software to cloud computing.  
Freight volume expanded during the period, and this 
expansion was attributed to improving economic condi-
tions. Increased demand was seen primarily from steel 
producers and service centers and the energy sector. A 
majority of our contacts reported that they were able to 
push through rate increases.  ■  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy expanded at a modest pace since the prior reporting period, with broad-based improvement 
across industry sectors. Manufacturers continued to see strong new orders and increased output. Shipments through 
District ports rose modestly, and reports on land and air freight were more positive. Retail sales growth picked up, on 
balance, as did tourism-related spending. Housing market activity continued to increase, although supply-side con-
straints limited growth. Lending picked up moderately, mostly due to more strength in business loan demand. Non-
financial services firms reported moderately higher revenues. Coal production increased, in large part due to supply 
disruptions in Australia, while agricultural conditions improved slightly. The District’s labor markets remained tight, and 
businesses continued to report modest wage increases. Prices were reportedly stable to rising moderately. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand strengthened moderately in recent weeks 
amidst continued reports of worker shortages. Employ-
ment agencies reported a modest increase in new job 
openings across all sectors, while executives in the 
services and retail industries noted increases in hiring. 
Generally, contacts reported labor shortages for comput-
er scientists, computer engineers, data scientists, weld-
ers, and technicians. Also, more manufacturers had 
difficulty finding quality workers for technical roles. Wag-
es increased modestly for firms in most industries, and 
employment agencies said that clients had started to 
increase wages for positions that remained unfilled. 
Prices  
Prices were generally stable to rising modestly. Manu-
facturers’ final goods prices continued to grow at a mod-
est rate, according to our most recent surveys; however, 
increases in input goods prices outpaced those in final 
goods. Specifically, prices recently rose for stainless 
steel and corrugated paper. Services firms indicated that 
price growth remained modest, overall, with the retail 
sector reporting a slightly faster pace of growth than the 
non-retail sector. Commercial real estate rents were 
stable to increasing slightly. Residential real estate pric-
es generally continued to rise modestly, with most of the 
growth coming from low to mid-priced homes. Beef and 
chicken prices were up slightly while energy prices were 
largely unchanged. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing firms continued to report strong growth in 
new orders and shipments. Producers of machinery, 
plastics and rubber, metal, corrugated packaging, and 
food manufacturing noted stronger business conditions 
in recent weeks. Overall, global supplier delivery times 
were unchanged, while some firms reported shorter 
domestic lead times. Expectations for the next six 
months were generally optimistic, with firms anticipating 
moderate increases in new orders and shipments.  
Ports and Transportation 
The volume of shipments through District ports was 
generally robust and increased moderately, with contacts 
at some facilities indicating that shipments set new rec-
ord highs again in March and April. Moreover, port exec-
utives indicated that both imports and exports continued 
to rise, although the pace of exports growth slowed 
somewhat, on balance. Imports of consumer goods were 
particularly robust, despite the struggles reported by 
national brick and mortar retailers; and light vehicle 
exports continued to increase at a healthy pace. Truck-
ing firms reported seasonal increases in shipments, with 
modest gains compared to a year earlier. A rail operator 
said that volumes rose in recent weeks due in part to 
more coal shipments to the ports. And a regional airport 
executive said that air freight was up strongly due to 
healthy manufacturing activity in his region.  
 
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail activity increased more quickly in April based on 
respondents’ assessment of sales and shopper traffic. 
The manager of a home goods store said that sales 
picked up in April as this Easter’s results exceeded those 
of a year earlier. An auto dealer in North Carolina noted 
a dramatic upturn in business, while a dealer in West 
Virginia saw a significant fall off in April following unusu-
ally strong sales in March. 
An adventure camp facility in western Virginia reported 
that bookings increased at a better-than-seasonal pace 
from March to April. Demand for hotel rooms remained 
strong in western North Carolina and the upstate region 
of South Carolina. In the outer banks of North Carolina, 
summer bookings were running ahead of previous years.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate sales increased moderately since 
the previous report. Sources reported stable levels of 
buyer traffic for new and existing single family homes, 
and expected steady buyer demand extending into early 
summer. Inventories remained low with the quick ab-
sorption of new homes, and average days on the market 
decreased modestly. Brokers reported that demand for 
condos increased at a steady pace; however limited 
inventory left sales unchanged. Homebuilders reported a 
reduction in buyer incentives, while sales in highly desir-
able communities rose modestly. The lack of subcontrac-
tors continued to push back construction timelines and 
limit new home starts.  
On balance, commercial real estate leasing rose moder-
ately. Retail leasing and sales remained strong, while 
office and industrial activity slowed modestly as invento-
ry remained limited. Land sales for new construction 
were steady, with continued robust pipelines. Contacts 
noted increased remodeling activity of grocery-anchored 
developments across the District. Rental rates increased 
moderately in most industrial, retail, and office markets. 
Retail development remained steady, while agents re-
ported limited office and industrial construction. Multifam-
ily building continued at moderate levels; however a few 
lenders noted that fewer new developments were being 
approved for financing. 
Banking and Finance 
Lending improved moderately since our previous report. 
Demand for residential mortgages was little changed on 
balance; however, demand picked up moderately in the 
District of Columbia. Residential refinance activity was 
stable to increasing modestly. Commercial real estate 
demand continued to expand at a moderate to robust 
pace although some contacts expressed concerns that 
multifamily was nearing a saturation point. A lender in 
Washington, D.C. also mentioned some worries of over-
building in the hospitality segment. Business lending 
increased modestly. Deposits by both consumers and 
businesses rose moderately, according to a banker in 
North Carolina, as deposit rates moved slightly higher. 
Credit quality was stable and credit standards were 
generally unchanged; however, a West Virginia banker 
noted slight tightening in certain commercial real estate 
categories, such as hospitality and retail.  
Non-Financial Services 
On balance, services firms indicated moderate revenue 
growth in our most recent survey. Telecommunication, 
administrative, and hospital services were the most 
consistently positive sectors. A contact in South Carolina 
saw a surge in demand for customer service and general 
office administration services. Strong reports also came 
from arts, entertainment, and amusement firms. A civil 
engineering company had an increase in new projects; 
however, revenue was down slightly as competition 
drove down bid prices. Meanwhile, a marketing execu-
tive in Virginia noted a moderate decline in demand in 
recent weeks. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Energy markets improved modestly in recent weeks. 
Coal production rose as supply constraints due to severe 
weather phenomena in Australia led to stronger global 
demand for domestically produced coal (both steam and 
metallurgical). Coal mining firms anticipate making capi-
tal investments in the near future if production and prices 
hold up. Agriculture conditions also improved slightly, 
particularly for beef and dairy farmers. In South Carolina, 
cotton and peanut planting was slightly behind schedule 
due to rain. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts reported economic activity continued at a modest pace from April through mid-May. The 
outlook among contacts remains optimistic with most firms expecting growth to accelerate over the next three to six 
months. District firms continued to report difficulties filling a range of positions, and wage growth remained steady. Non-
labor input cost pressures were subdued. On balance, District merchants reported no change in sales since the previ-
ous report; however, auto dealers indicated sales of light trucks and SUVs continued to improve. The tourism sector 
noted some softening in activity. According to residential real estate contacts, new and existing home sales were up, 
and home prices modestly appreciated compared with a year ago. New home construction increased since the previous 
report. Commercial real estate contacts noted demand continued to improve. While overall nonresidential construction 
increased from a year ago, multifamily construction showed some signs of slowing. Manufacturing purchasing managers 
cited increases in new orders and production.  
Employment and Wages  
While some contacts noted that demand for mid- to high-
skilled professional and business service positions had 
moderated, many continued to describe a tightening 
labor market among information technology, skilled craft 
and technical, and increasingly in entry-level positions, 
particularly in hospitality and food services. Many con-
tractors and manufacturers from construction-related 
fields continued to report that their inability to find quali-
fied workers was impeding growth. Contacts from the 
energy industry mentioned that the lack of available 
skilled craft labor was a roadblock to petrochemical-
related construction. In response to labor shortages and 
rising turnover, a growing number of firms indicated that 
they were directing resources towards creating internal 
training and development programs for both new hires 
and existing staff, covering technical education as well 
as company culture and soft skills. Firms also continued 
to mention workforce development partnerships, appren-
ticeships, early education training, and dual enrollment 
programs at high schools. Wage growth remained stable 
with exceptions in high-growth areas and in high-
demand trades.   
Prices  
Non-labor input costs remained muted in general; how-
ever, manufacturing purchasing managers continued to 
note greater increases in commodity prices. Contacts 
still indicated limited ability to raise prices. According to 
the Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey, 
year-over-year unit costs were up 1.8 percent in May. 
Survey respondents indicated they expect unit costs to 
rise 2.0 percent over the next twelve months.   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
On balance, District retail contacts reported that sales 
levels remained flat since the last report. Retailers noted 
that consumers were cautious about their discretionary 
spending and expect modest increases in spending over 
the summer months. Sales of light trucks SUVs in-
creased in April, according to auto dealers. 
Sentiment among tourism and hospitality contacts 
across the District remains cautiously optimistic. Reports 
noted an increase in the number of visitors in the first 
four months of the year compared to the same time 
period last year. However, contacts noted that the pace 
of food, beverage, and merchandise spending from 
visitors slowed since the last report, a trend that is ex-
pected to persist for the remainder of the year.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Reports from District residential real estate contacts in 
April signaled continued growth. Most builders noted that 
construction activity was up from the year-ago level. 
Many brokers and builders reported an increase in home 
sales relative to one year earlier. The majority of builder 
and broker contacts said buyer traffic was up from the 
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
previous year’s level. Residential contacts noted that 
inventory levels were unchanged or down compared to 
the year-ago level. Both builders and brokers indicated 
modest gains in home prices. Home sales expectations 
were positive, with most brokers and builders anticipat-
ing sales will increase slightly over the next three months 
relative to the year-earlier level. Most builders expect 
construction activity to hold steady at the current pace or 
increase slightly over the next three months. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts reported 
improvements in demand that have resulted in rent 
growth and increased absorption, but the rate of im-
provement varied by metropolitan area, submarket, and 
property type. The majority of commercial contractors 
indicated that the pace of nonresidential construction 
activity had risen from one year ago, with many reporting 
increasing backlogs. While most reports indicated that 
the pace of multifamily construction matched or exceed-
ed the year-ago level, a growing share of contacts re-
ported that multifamily construction is down. Looking 
forward, the majority of District commercial construction 
contacts expect nonresidential construction activity to 
increase in the second quarter, while expectations for 
the pace of multifamily construction was mixed.   
Manufacturing 
District manufacturers continued to indicate that overall 
business activity remained strong. New orders and pro-
duction levels increased at a solid pace and purchasing 
agents reported that supply delivery times were persis-
tently getting longer. The outlook for future production 
remained optimistic, with just over half of firms expecting 
higher production levels over the next six months. 
Transportation 
District transportation contacts indicated that demand 
was largely consistent with the previous report. Rail 
activity, including intermodal, remained relatively flat. 
District ports noted further strength in shipments of con-
tainers, automobiles, and breakbulk cargo. Trucking 
companies cited increased movements of construction-
related materials, and logistics contacts reported contin-
ued growth in ecommerce shipments. Roughly half of 
contacts expect higher levels of activity in the second 
half of the year.  
Banking and Finance  
Credit remained readily available for most qualified bor-
rowers, although some small businesses continued to 
experience difficulty obtaining loans. Contacts noted that 
regulatory capital requirements constrained commercial 
and construction lending at some banks, and most com-
mercial lending activity revolved around refinancing. 
Lenders increased oversight of construction loans and 
were growing more cautious in multi-family lending.  
Energy  
Reports from energy contacts indicated that rising shale 
production created new pipeline projects to transport oil 
and gas to refining centers on the Gulf Coast. Contacts 
also indicated that oil and gas inventories remained 
elevated despite increased demand. Utility industry 
contacts across the District reported that demand in 
industrial and residential usage increased slightly while 
commercial demand declined. 
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. By 
early-May, overall drought conditions had improved in 
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee while Alabama, 
Georgia, and Florida reported sizeable areas of drought 
conditions ranging from abnormally dry to extreme. The 
May forecast for Florida oranges was up slightly from 
April but remained considerably lower than last season’s 
production. District cotton, soybean, rice, and peanut 
plantings in early May were ahead of the five-year aver-
age, with the exception of Tennessee’s cotton and soy-
bean crops and Florida’s peanut crop, which were mod-
estly below their five-year averages. On a year-over-year 
basis, prices paid to farmers in March were up for cotton, 
soybeans, and broilers but remained down for corn, rice, 
beef, and eggs. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District slowed to a modest pace in April and early May. Respondents’ out-
looks for growth over the next 6 to 12 months also pulled back some, but remained positive on balance. Employment, 
business spending, and manufacturing production grew at a moderate rate, while construction and real estate grew 
modestly and consumer spending decreased slightly. Prices rose modestly. Conditions were little changed in the finan-
cial and agricultural sectors. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth remained at a moderate rate over 
the reporting period, and contacts expected it to continue 
at this pace over the next six to twelve months. Contacts 
continued to report that the labor market was tight and 
that it was difficult to fill positions at any skill level. Hiring 
was focused on professional and technical, sales, and 
production workers, and there was an increase in the 
number of contacts hiring sales and production workers. 
A staffing firm that primarily supplies manufacturers with 
production workers reported an increase in billable hours 
after more than a year of little change. Wage growth was 
modest overall, with increases more likely for high-skilled 
occupations. That said, a manufacturing firm that was 
expanding raised wages for unskilled workers 10% and 
noted a significant improvement in retention and the 
quality of applicants. A number of contacts reported a 
rise in benefits costs. 
 
Prices  
Prices again rose modestly overall in April and early 
May. That said, retail prices changed little in general, 
though prices fell some at grocery stores. Materials costs 
were generally little changed over the reporting period, 
though a number of contacts noted that prices of many 
commodities were higher than they were six months ago. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending decreased slightly overall in April 
and early May. Non-auto retail sales levels were flat, with 
strong growth in e-commerce balancing out declines for 
brick and mortar stores. Nevertheless, contacts contin-
ued to expect stronger sales in the summer months. 
Sales of new light vehicles slowed some, and automaker 
and dealer contacts reported that they had revised down 
expected sales for the calendar year. In contrast, con-
tacts reported an increase in sales of used vehicles. 
 
Business Spending 
Growth in business spending picked up to a moderate 
pace in April and early May. Many retailers indicated that 
their inventories were slightly elevated, while a number 
of auto dealers thought their stocks were much too high. 
Manufacturing inventories were generally at desired 
levels, with the exception of those at steel service cen-
ters, which continued to be low. Growth in capital ex-
penditures picked up to a moderate pace, and contacts 
expected growth to continue at a moderate pace over 
the next six to twelve months. Outlays were primarily for 
replacing industrial and IT equipment. Shipping volumes 
increased slightly. 
 
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased modestly 
on balance over the reporting period. Residential build-
ing rose moderately, led by growth in the single-family 
segment. The pace of home sales was little changed, but 
prices increased moderately, as multiple contacts report-
ed a limited supply of homes. Demand for nonresidential 
construction increased slightly, with improvements con-
centrated in the industrial sector. The pace of commer-
cial real estate activity also increased slightly, with gains 
in both the for-lease and for-sale segments. Contacts in 
the Chicago area believed that the market was cooling 
some, while a contact in West Michigan indicated that 
the market was the strongest it has been for some time. 
Commercial rents edged up, as vacancy rates and the 
availability of sublease space decreased a bit. 
 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production again grew at a moderate rate 
in April and early May, and growth was widespread 
across sectors. Demand for steel continued to grow at a 
moderate pace, as contacts reported strong demand 
from auto manufacturers and improving demand from 
the energy and heavy machinery industries. Heavy ma-
chinery manufacturers themselves reported increased 
demand, led by the energy sector. Specialty metals 
manufacturers also reported growing order books, and 
contacts highlighted new orders from the defense and 
energy sectors. Manufacturers of construction materials 
continued to report slow increases in shipments, in line 
with the pace of improvement in construction. Production 
in the auto and aerospace sectors was unchanged, but 
remained at high levels. 
 
Banking and Finance 
Banking and financial conditions were largely unchanged 
over the reporting period. Financial market participants 
reported stable market conditions and low volatility. 
Business loan demand was up slightly, credit quality 
remained strong, and contacts reported declining delin-
quencies in the oil and gas sector. Consumer loan de-
mand was steady on balance, though credit quality de-
clined slightly. Residential mortgage activity increased, 
with contacts noting more originations and home equity 
loans. One contact said that the low supply of homes for 
sale was leading to increased interest in home construc-
tion loans. Credit card volume was steady, though delin-
quencies ticked up. Auto loan demand declined slightly. 
 
 
Agriculture 
The outlook for crop income was unchanged through 
April and early May despite wet weather slowing planting 
in much of the District. Corn and soybean planting was 
behind the pace of a typical year, and in some areas wet
- and cold-spells killed crops that had already been 
planted. Corn and soybean prices were up slightly.  
Incomes for dairy farmers deteriorated a bit on balance. 
Some dairy operations in the District scrambled to find 
alternative buyers after new restrictions on imports of 
ultrafiltered milk into Canada cut demand for U.S. milk. 
Incomes for hog and cattle operations improved as pric-
es increased in spite of ample supply. Michigan fruit 
growers faced increased uncertainty after a major freeze 
potentially damaged their plants. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have continued to expand at a modest pace since our previous report. District labor market condi-
tions continue to improve, with modest employment growth and moderate growth in wages. Reports from retail contacts 
paint a mixed picture on consumer spending, with signs of weakening auto sales but positive reports from non-auto 
contacts. Manufacturing contacts generally reported increases in new orders. Real estate contacts reported that low 
inventories and higher construction costs continue to reduce home sales and push up prices, while banking contacts 
reported strong growth in the demand for mortgages. In general, business contacts surveyed in mid-May continued to 
hold an optimistic outlook for growth in 2017. On net, 55 percent of contacts expect District economic conditions in 2017 
to be better or somewhat better than last year. This outlook was generally unchanged since contacts were surveyed in 
mid-February. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased modestly since the previous 
report. Of the business contacts surveyed in mid-May, 
on net, 31 percent reported that second-quarter employ-
ment was higher or slightly higher than a year ago and 
40 percent expect third-quarter employment to be higher 
or slightly higher than a year ago. Contacts continued to 
report difficulties finding skilled or motivated employees. 
Construction contacts in St. Louis, Louisville, and Mem-
phis reported shortages of workers, with a contact in 
Louisville noting that the shortage has affected their 
ability to complete work. 
Contacts reported moderate wage growth since the 
previous report. On net, 61 percent of contacts reported 
wages and labor costs were higher or slightly higher than 
a year ago; however, a slightly smaller share expect 
increases in the third quarter. Contacts in construction, 
manufacturing, and banking reported increasing wages 
to retain and attract employees. However, a contact in 
Louisville noted that a shortage of workers in information 
technology has not resulted in increased wages. In 
addition, depressed agriculture prices have kept wage 
increases to a minimum in eastern Arkansas. 
Prices  
Price pressures in the District were moderate. Business 
contacts surveyed reported that prices charged to con-
sumers and non-labor input costs increased moderately. 
Contacts reported prices and non-labor costs were 
slightly higher or higher than a year ago. Contacts also 
reported that healthcare costs have increased         
moderately. 
House prices increased moderately. Real estate con-
tacts reported that high costs of residential construction 
are pushing house prices higher and lack of construction 
labor is pushing up costs of commercial construction 
projects. Contacts reported increasing costs of raw ma-
terials. In particular, prices of lumber, concrete, and 
sheetrock have increased more than expected. 
Contacts in the agriculture sector in Memphis and St. 
Louis reported that lower crop prices continued to nega-
tively affect their business. Since the previous report, 
cash prices of wheat and corn decreased moderately. 
However, prices for sorghum and cotton have increased 
moderately and the price of soybeans increased slightly, 
while rice and coal prices did not change. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers portray a mixed picture of consumer spending activi-
ty. General retailers reported moderate sales growth, 
although contacts in Arkansas and Missouri reported 
year-over-year declines in April sales tax collection. Sixty
-three percent of surveyed auto dealers reported a re-
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
duction in year-over-year sales halfway through the 
second quarter. On net, 50 percent expect this negative 
growth to continue into the next quarter. Hospitality 
contacts in St. Louis and Louisville indicated a modest 
increase in business activity after a slow first quarter. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased at a moderate pace 
since our previous report. Several companies across a 
broad range of industries reported capital expenditure 
and facility expansion plans, including firms that manu-
facture textiles, nonmetallic mineral products, transporta-
tion equipment, and food products. In a recent survey, 
contacts reported continued improvement in manufactur-
ing conditions. The majority reported that production, 
new orders, and capacity utilization increased in the 
second quarter relative to one year ago. The results are 
generally unchanged from our previous survey in mid-
February. Contacts were generally optimistic about the 
third quarter, with 65 percent, on net, expecting further 
growth in production, new orders, and capacity utiliza-
tion. Despite the optimistic outlook, some contacts ex-
pressed concerns about regulatory uncertainty and the 
difficulty of finding employees. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports from the service sector have been positive since 
the previous report. More than two-thirds of transporta-
tion and service contacts reported that sales met or 
exceeded expectations in the current quarter. On net, 25 
percent of contacts expect sales to be higher in the next 
quarter than they were at that time last year. Firms that 
provide transportation, utility, and information technology 
services reported plans to expand facilities and hire 
employees. Reports from healthcare firms remain mixed. 
One major hospital announced layoffs in the Louisville 
area, citing uncertainty around healthcare reform and 
low patient volumes. Another healthcare provider cited 
high costs as a reason for lower-than-expected sales 
over the past quarter. Other healthcare providers in 
Louisville and Memphis announced expansions. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has declined modestly 
since the previous report. Home sales remained flat or 
decreased in the District’s largest metro areas. Several 
contacts reported that significant shortages in inventory 
have hindered sales, particularly in Louisville, as single-
family demand has continued to be strong. Local inven-
tory levels are mostly expected to decline further in the 
coming months. Some contacts noted a beneficial im-
pact from a slight decrease in mortgage rates. 
Residential construction improved modestly since the 
previous report. On net, 40 percent of contacts reported 
a slight increase in residential construction relative to the 
same time last year and about the same fraction expect 
this trend to continue through the third quarter. 
Commercial real estate activity has also improved mod-
estly since the previous report. Contacts continued to 
indicate an increase in demand for both office and indus-
trial properties compared with the same time last year. 
Meanwhile, most contacts reported no change or a slight 
increase in multifamily property demand and no change 
or a slight decrease in retail property demand.  
Commercial construction activity remained robust. Local 
construction contacts reported relatively no change to 
demand across most property types. Some contacts 
noted an increase in multifamily and industrial building. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions continued to strengthen at a moder-
ate pace, driven primarily by strong growth in demand for 
business and mortgage loans. Demand for auto loans 
was flat over the period and is expected to remain level 
over the coming quarter, while overall loan demand is 
expected to grow at a moderate rate. The creditworthi-
ness of applicants for agriculture loans worsened for a 
third straight quarter; credit standards for agricultural 
lending increased relative to a year ago and are ex-
pected to continue tightening in the near term. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agriculture conditions deteriorated significantly due to 
flooding across the District. Mid-May percentages of corn 
and rice crops rated fair or better were down or un-
changed from a year ago in every state for which data 
were reported. Flooding and rain also slowed planting, 
with planned acreage planted for corn, cotton, rice, and 
soybeans each below the percentages of the previous 
year. Cotton was the farthest off last year’s planting 
pace. 
Natural resource extraction conditions improved modest-
ly from the previous report and year. Seasonally adjust-
ed coal production growth was up slightly from March to 
April, and April production was also 14 percent above 
last year’s level. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
www.research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew moderately, tempered by poor 
labor availability. Wage pressure was moderate to strong, while price pressure was modest. The District economy 
showed growth in professional services, construction, manufacturing, energy, and mining. Consumer spending and tour-
ism were mixed, while residential and commercial real estate activity declined slightly, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew moderately since the last report, 
tempered by poor labor availability. Initial unemployment 
claims dropped by 16 percent over the most recent six-
week period compared with a year earlier, and 
continuing claims dropped by 11 percent. April 
employment figures were strong, and contacts reported 
healthy labor demand. Job openings were growing in the 
oil-producing area of North Dakota, including for jobs 
outside energy production. A Minnesota staffing contact 
said, “We can’t keep up. I have to say no to clients 
regularly – there is strong demand from our clients for 
talent,” but a lack of available workers. A job fair in 
exurban Minneapolis-St. Paul saw employer booths sold 
out for the second straight year and a “much longer” wait 
list for booths. A job-fair contact in Missoula, Mont., said 
job openings were plentiful and employers were more 
anxious to fill openings, with some spot hiring. In 
northern Minnesota, “some businesses are suggesting 
they may have to cut back in services if they cannot find 
more workers,” said a regional source. Another said it 
was “constantly” trying to fill 30 open positions among a 
workforce of 250. However, there were a number of 
layoffs, including 200 at a distribution center, 232 at a 
business services firm, and 250 from an insurer, all in 
Minnesota. Numerous government agencies also 
announced labor cutbacks, though many were through 
attrition.  
Wage pressure was moderate to strong since the last 
report. An ad hoc survey of professional services firms in 
Minnesota found that average wages were expected to 
rise about 3 percent in 2017. Anecdotally, contacts said 
average wages were increasing up to 3 percent, with 
some technical and health care jobs receiving wage 
increases closer to 5 percent. In Michigan’s Upper 
Peninsula, construction workers were seeing 3 percent 
to 4 percent wage increases. A distribution center in 
southern Minnesota was hiring again and raised starting 
wages to $17.50 per hour, the third consecutive annual 
rise in starting wages, according to a local contact. In 
western Montana, wages were trending upward, but 
more modestly because “employers tend to tout benefits 
and working conditions more than wages.”  
Prices  
Price pressure was modest since the last report. Just 
over half of respondents to a Minneapolis Fed survey of 
District businesses reported that input costs had 
increased slightly compared with a year earlier, while 40 
percent said costs were unchanged. An electrical utility 
in Minnesota announced plans to raise residential rates 
2.7 percent this year, about half as much as it increased 
rates last year; a Montana electrical utility also 
announced that it was reducing rates. Most prices 
received by farmers decreased in March from a year 
earlier, with the exception of soybeans, milk, chickens, 
and hogs.  
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending across the District was mixed since 
the last report. Car dealers from Rapid City, S.D., 
reported that used car sales rose by as much as 25 
percent, but new car sales remained flat over the past 
six months. Elsewhere in South Dakota, sales tax 
revenues were down by 1 percent, indicating a slight 
downturn in consumer spending in the state. A national 
shoe store chain was closing eight stores across the 
Ninth District due to bankruptcy. Benefitting from healthy 
home construction in Minnesota, a tile-supply chain store 
saw first-quarter sales increase by 9 percent from the 
previous year. 
Tourism conditions were mixed since the previous 
report. Canadian tourists decreased across Ninth District 
states, which tourism officials attributed to the exchange 
rate. However, tourists from China and across the United 
States continued to show up in record numbers to 
national parks in Montana. With high levels of snow still 
on the mountains of Montana, ski resorts reported record 
numbers of visitors.  
Services 
Professional services activity was up modestly.  A 
scanning technology firm saw increased business, due in 
large part to increased activity in construction and 
engineering. A law firm with offices across the Ninth 
District reported increased business associated with 
security risks and concerns. An electronic health records 
software firm witnessed an uptick in business since the 
last report.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction activity was up modestly since the last 
report. An industry count of total nonresidential 
construction projects in the District showed an increase 
compared with the same period a year earlier, including 
a notable increase in local government projects. 
Commercial permitting in April rose in Fargo, N.D., Sioux 
Falls, S.D., and Rochester, Minn., but was flat in other 
regions, and declined in Minneapolis and Rapid City. 
Strong multifamily housing development continued in 
many District markets. But construction in other 
commercial sectors was slower, according to industry 
contacts, particularly in Minneapolis-St. Paul. Residential 
building, on the other hand, strengthened since the last 
report. Sizable increases in the number of permitted, 
single-family homes in April occurred in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul, Rochester, and Missoula, with smaller increases in 
Billings, Mont., and St. Cloud., Minn. Home building 
remained lower among North Dakota metros. 
Commercial real estate declined slightly since the last 
report, though from strong levels. Retail and office 
vacancy rates in Minneapolis-St. Paul ticked higher, 
while industrial rates remained unchanged. Commercial 
real estate transactions also slowed slightly. Thanks to 
significant new construction, hotel occupancy rates in 
Minnesota were expected to decline, leading to a drop in 
average room rates by the end of the year, contacts 
said. Residential real estate slowed, much of it 
reportedly due to low inventory. April home sales were 
lower in the Flathead region of Montana, as well as in 
northern and western Wisconsin counties. In many 
cases, slow April sales followed strong March sales. In 
Minnesota, March home sales rose 8 percent, only to fall 
by 11 percent in April. In Sioux Falls, April sales fell 11 
percent after jumping 18 percent in March, but April 
median prices there were up 6 percent from a year 
earlier, according to an industry source. “Buyer demand 
has not abated, nor is it expected to in the immediate 
future.”  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased modestly since 
the last report. An index of manufacturing conditions 
produced by Creighton University indicated increased 
activity in April compared with a month earlier in 
Minnesota and the Dakotas. Respondents to an annual 
survey of Minnesota manufacturers indicated the highest 
level of confidence in the 10-year history of the survey. A 
truck trailer manufacturer was expanding into a recently 
shuttered boat factory in Minnesota. However, a plant 
that produces matches was shut down in Minnesota, and 
a producer of residential construction materials delayed 
plans to open a new plant.    
Agriculture, Energy and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions remained weak since the 
previous report because of continued low commodity 
prices. However, growing conditions have improved. 
After heavy rains slowed early planting, progress as of 
mid-May was roughly on par with five-year averages in 
most District states. Activity in the energy and mining 
sectors increased. District oil and gas drilling as of mid-
May increased slightly from a month earlier. A Montana 
gold mine announced plans to expand, and a Minnesota 
iron mine began producing a new ore output. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District continued to increase moderately in April and early May, and most sectors ex-
pected continued growth in future months. Professional, high-tech, and transportation firms reported a strong increase in 
sales, and manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace. District real estate activity rose moderately, and con-
sumer spending contacts reported a modest increase in sales. District energy activity also expanded modestly com-
pared to the previous survey period, and bankers reported steady overall loan demand, stable deposit levels, and a 
slight decline loan quality. Agricultural credit conditions remained weak, with subdued farm income and continued low 
commodity prices. Employment and employee hours continued to increase at a modest pace in late April and May, and 
contacts in most sectors reported moderate wage growth. Input prices were up slightly over the previous survey period, 
while selling prices held steady in most sectors. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall District employment and employee hours contin-
ued to increase at a modest pace in late April and May, 
and expectations were positive for the coming months. 
Contacts in the retail, wholesale trade, transportation, 
professional and high-tech, real estate, tourism, and 
manufacturing sectors noted an increase in employment 
over the previous survey period, while contacts in the 
auto, health services, and restaurant industries noted a 
decline. All sectors except auto, restaurants, and tourism 
reported positive expectations for employment in the 
coming months. Average employee hours for the ser-
vices sector rose modestly over the previous survey 
period, and the manufacturing sector saw a slight decline 
but was on par with year-ago levels. Average employee 
hours’ expectations for both the services and manufac-
turing sectors were positive. Respondents noted a short-
age of commercial drivers, skilled technicians, and ser-
vice workers.  
Contacts in most sectors reported moderate wage 
growth, and anticipated continued moderate wage 
growth in the coming months. 
Prices  
Overall, input prices were up slightly compared to the 
prior survey period, while selling prices rose or held 
steady, and contacts expected additional price increases 
in the months ahead. Respondents in the retail sector 
reported modestly higher input and selling prices, with 
both expected to rise moderately moving forward. Res-
taurant input prices were up slightly, while selling prices 
held steady. In the transportation sector, input prices 
edged up and selling prices were stable. Construction 
prices rose moderately, and expectations were for mod-
erate price increases in the coming months. Manufactur-
ers reported slight growth in prices for finished goods, 
and raw material costs continued to edge higher. Manu-
facturers anticipated modest increases in both finished 
goods and raw material prices over the next few months. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending activity continued to rise modestly, 
while expectations for future growth increased at a 
strong pace. Retail sales expanded slightly over the 
previous survey period and were moderately above year-
ago levels. Several retailers noted an increase in sales 
for outdoor and sale items, while luxury products sold 
poorly. Contacts anticipated sales to rise strongly in the 
next few months, and inventory levels were expected to 
moderate. Auto sales fell modestly but were above year-
ago levels. Dealer contacts anticipated a strong increase 
in sales for the months ahead. Auto inventories were 
expected to remain mostly flat heading forward. Restau-
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
rant sales fell moderately but were above year-ago lev-
els. Contacts expected a strong rebound in activity head-
ing forward. District tourism activity increased moderate-
ly and remained above year-ago levels. Tourism con-
tacts expected strong activity heading into the summer 
months.   
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded at a moderate pace in 
April and early May, and most other business contacts 
reported increased sales. Manufacturers reported contin-
ued modest growth in production, particularly for metals, 
machinery, and aircraft products. Shipments, new or-
ders, and order backlogs expanded slightly, and activity 
was modestly higher than a year ago. Manufacturers’ 
capital spending plans were mostly positive, and firms’ 
expectations for future activity remained favorable.   
Outside of manufacturing, professional, high-tech, and 
transportation firms reported strong sales increases, 
while wholesale trade contacts indicated a smaller in-
crease in sales than the previous survey. All firms ex-
pected a moderate improvement in sales in the next six 
months. Professional, high-tech, and wholesale trade 
firms reported strong capital spending plans, while trans-
portation firms anticipated more modest growth in capital 
expenditures heading forward. 
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity rose at a moderate pace since 
the previous survey period, and contacts expected addi-
tional gains moving forward. Residential home sales and 
prices were slightly higher than year-ago levels and 
expectations were for continued growth. Sales of low- 
and medium-priced homes outpaced sales of higher-
priced homes. Inventories in residential housing were 
moderately below year-ago levels, but expectations were 
for a modest increase in the months ahead. Activity in 
residential construction increased at a moderate pace as 
new home sales, housing starts, and inventories rose. 
Commercial real estate activity continued to increase at 
a modest pace over the previous survey period as va-
cancy rates declined and absorption, completions, con-
struction, sales, prices and rents rose. The commercial 
real estate sector was expected to increase at a modest 
pace in the coming months. 
Banking 
Bankers reported steady overall loan demand for the 
period from April through early May.  A majority of re-
spondents indicated a steady demand for commercial 
and industrial, residential real estate, agricultural and 
consumer installment loans. While most bankers report-
ed stable demand for commercial real estate loans, a 
relatively higher proportion than other types indicated 
increasing demand. Most bankers indicated loan quality 
was unchanged compared to a year ago, although nearly 
one third reported a slight decline in quality. In addition, 
most respondents expected loan quality to remain es-
sentially the same over the next six months. Credit 
standards remained largely unchanged in all major loan 
categories. Finally, a majority of respondents reported 
stable deposit levels.  
Energy 
District energy activity expanded modestly compared to 
the prior survey period, and expectations remained 
positive. The announcement by OPEC and Russia to 
maintain production quotas through early 2018 was seen 
as contributing toward rebalancing the oil oversupply. 
The number of active oil and gas drilling rigs continued 
to increase, particularly in Oklahoma. Some respondents 
commented that mostly stable prices have helped pro-
mote increased drilling activity, but they continued to 
closely monitor the effects of price changes on budgets. 
Contacts also reported further slight increases in ser-
vices costs for well completions. 
Agriculture 
Persistently weak farm income continued to weigh on the 
District’s farm economy and agricultural credit condi-
tions. District contacts reported that wheat and corn 
prices remained below profitable levels. Soybean prices 
were also lower than in the previous year, but remained 
mostly profitable. Cattle prices increased since the previ-
ous reporting period and feedlots reported a modest 
increase in profits. However, adverse weather and wild-
fires in the western portion of the District reduced pro-
duction expectations for cattle and wheat in the region. 
More generally, bankers in the western portion of the 
District reported a sharper decline in farm income and 
credit conditions than bankers in the eastern portion. 
Overall, District bankers continued to report weaker 
repayment rates on agricultural loans and an increase in 
borrowers with carry-over debt. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy continued to expand at a moderate pace over the past six weeks. Manufacturing output 
rose, and activity in nonfinancial services increased. Retail sales strengthened slightly, despite some reports of soften-
ing in auto sales. Housing demand grew, lending activity increased, and the energy sector saw further improvement. 
Production prospects for crops were mostly favorable. Employment and wages rose, as did prices. Outlooks generally 
improved, although a few firms noted they were in wait-and-see mode due to uncertainty surrounding U.S. trade poli-
cies. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall employment rose moderately, and upward wage 
pressures were similar to the last report. Manufacturers 
added to payrolls, with some noting that labor shortages 
were putting pressure on wages. Hiring in the services 
sector continued, including slight job gains in retail. The 
construction labor market generally remained tight, 
although a slight easing in the availability of workers and 
an easing in upward wage pressures was noted. Staffing 
firms noted a surge in demand for white-collar workers in 
the oil and gas industry, and energy firms cited upward 
wage pressures, particularly for certain skills sets and 
experienced personnel. Leisure and hospitality contacts 
said they have not been able to fill many entry-level and 
seasonal positions due to a lower number and inferior 
quality of applicants compared with past years.  
Prices 
Selling prices generally increased over the reporting 
period. An exception was in retail, where prices held 
steady. Some leisure and hospitality contacts reported 
increased pricing power, and oilfield service firms report-
ed higher prices, reflecting a pickup in demand for their 
services. Construction contacts noted higher lumber 
prices, while auto dealers reported downward pressure 
on margins, particularly for new vehicle sales. Retail 
gasoline and diesel prices fell over the reporting period 
as softer oil prices, high product inventories and slowing 
demand growth weighed on markets. Cattle prices expe-
rienced a strong spring rally, supported by solid domestic 
and international demand for beef. Corn and sorghum 
prices remained near breakeven levels, while wheat 
prices were below production costs.  
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector continued over 
the past six weeks. Output growth picked up for nondu-
rables, and remained positive for durables, particularly 
for nonmetallic mineral product, primary metals and 
fabricated metals manufacturing. Outlooks stayed posi-
tive, although a few firms expressed concern regarding 
trade policy uncertainty. 
Refinery utilization rates increased across the U.S. as 
the spring maintenance season wrapped up. Contacts 
said that 2017 will likely be a difficult year for the refining 
business because large product inventories and expec-
tations of slower demand growth will likely keep margins 
low. Gulf coast chemical producers noted both healthy 
global demand and margins. The outlook for domestic 
chemical manufacturers remained optimistic due to 
expectations of persistent raw materials cost advantages 
over their international counterparts.  
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Retail sales rose at a slightly faster pace than the previ-
ous reporting period, and outlooks were positive. Con-
tacts continued to express concern about weak sales 
along the Texas-Mexico border, although luxury retailers 
in this region were expected to fare better than other 
retailers. Auto sales rose but there were some reports of 
softening in sales. Contacts said auto dealers were 
seeing rising inventories and declining margins. Auto 
lenders have tightened credit amid an increase in delin-
quencies.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Demand for nonfinancial services expanded moderately 
over the past six weeks, and outlooks remained fairly 
optimistic. Most staffing firms said demand increased 
since the last report, and all contacts noted that orders 
were up year over year. Staffing demand remained 
particularly strong in Dallas, and Houston saw an uptick 
as well, albeit a smaller one. Professional and technical 
service firms cited revenue gains, with several firms 
noting a pickup in activity. Transportation service firms 
mostly reported higher revenues and increased cargo 
activity. Rail cargo rose, with continued strength in ship-
ments of grains and crushed stone, which is used for 
fracking sand. Air and parcel shipments were up, while 
trucking cargo volumes were flat. Reports from the lei-
sure and hospitality sector were mixed, with some noting 
increased activity and others reporting declines.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales rose during the reporting period, although 
respondents noted persistent softness at the higher end. 
Contacts said the spring selling season was shaping up 
well, with year-to-date sales mostly on or ahead of plan 
for builders. However, buyers remained price sensitive, 
making it difficult to raise prices despite higher costs, 
squeezing builders' margins. Contacts said builders are 
becoming more selective in lot purchases due to high 
prices, and some are shifting their focus to bringing more 
moderately priced products to market. Outlooks were 
positive, and overall sentiment in Houston was more 
upbeat than this time last year.  
Apartment leasing activity in Houston was better than 
expected, and one contact noted that absorption (year to 
date through April) was slowly returning to a more nor-
mal pace. Apartment construction remained elevated in 
Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW), but was moderating in Austin. 
Financing for new multifamily properties remained diffi-
cult to obtain. 
Office leasing activity was solid in DFW, but continued to 
be sluggish in Houston. Industrial demand was holding 
up in DFW, but there was some concern about the ele-
vated level of construction. 
Financial Services 
Loan demand increased in the district over the reporting 
period. Total loan volumes expanded, with a substantial 
portion of the gains concentrated in commercial and 
industrial (C&I) lending and in residential and commer-
cial real estate (CRE) loans. Lenders reported higher net 
interest margins and non-interest income, improved loan 
performance, and a slight tightening of credit standards 
on C&I and CRE loans. Deposit volumes expanded over 
the past six weeks, supported by an increase in interest 
rates. The outlook for the next six months or so was 
mostly optimistic, with expectations of improved loan 
demand and business activity.  
Energy 
Demand for oilfield services continued to improve, and 
firms noted receiving higher prices for their services, 
particularly in the Permian Basin. Drilling activity rose 
further in the Permian and Eagle Ford regions. Several 
contacts said the increase in the rig count is likely not 
sustainable and expect that it will taper off or even plat-
eau around mid-2017. Outlooks remained positive, alt-
hough contacts were more guarded in their optimism 
compared with the previous report. 
Agriculture 
Moisture levels remained favorable across the district. 
The wheat crop was in good shape and harvest was 
getting underway, although acreage was down from last 
year because prices were below the cost of production. 
Production prospects for corn and sorghum were strong. 
This year is expected to be a good one for Texas cotton, 
with a sharp rise in acres planted prompted by relatively 
high prices, and strong yields expected due to good 
subsoil moisture. Demand for cotton continued to be 
strong, particularly for exports. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of April 
through late May. Overall, price inflation was steady. The labor market tightened further, while upward wage pressures 
grew moderately overall. Sales of retail goods grew modestly, and growth in the consumer and business services sec-
tors remained strong. Manufacturing activity picked up to a modest pace, and conditions in the agriculture sector were 
mixed. Contacts reported continued strong activity in residential real estate markets. Lending activity grew at a moder-
ate pace. 
Employment and Wages  
On balance, the labor market tightened further, and 
contacts reported continued moderate wage gains. In the 
technology, financial services, and health-care sectors, 
demand for skilled information technology (IT) labor 
remained strong, pushing up wages for those workers. 
Contacts in the hotel industry noted widespread strong 
upward wage pressure for all positions, with one contact 
reporting plans to raise workers’ wages. Recent changes 
in immigration policy created substantial labor supply 
shortages for low-skilled workers in the agriculture sec-
tor; as a consequence, some growers discarded portions 
of their harvest. Several contacts observed that appli-
cants for some low-skilled positions did not meet the 
minimum job requirements or were unable to pass pre-
employment screenings such as drug tests. Cost pres-
sures in the steel industry resulted in employment reduc-
tions and slowed wage growth. 
Prices  
Overall, price growth was steady over the reporting 
period. Electricity prices expanded at a moderate pace. 
Prices for branded and generic pharmaceuticals contin-
ued to increase more slowly than in previous years. 
Competitive pressures pushed down prices for cloud 
computing services and data storage. Price growth in the 
apparel industry declined, as consumers continued a 
long-run shift from designer products towards lower-
priced substitutes. Contacts in the restaurant industry 
reported that increased labor costs via minimum wage 
increases were passed along to consumers.  
Retail Trade and Services 
Overall, retail sales expanded at a modest pace. Sales 
at clothing and accessories retailers improved modestly, 
but one contact reported that bankruptcies and store 
closures were on the rise. Sales of beverage products 
rebounded from a slow first quarter, although vendors 
without an online presence continued to lose market 
share to online sales. Demand for automobiles weak-
ened and inventories rose. Contacts expect vehicle sales 
to continue to decline. Pharmaceutical sales growth 
slowed somewhat.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
remained strong, with growth varying by industry. De-
mand for IT business services remained robust due to 
investments in cloud computing and big data solutions in 
the financial services, health-care and manufacturing 
sectors. However, demand for legacy IT services contin-
ued to soften. E-commerce sales continued to drive 
strong domestic demand for transportation services. 
Hotel bookings edged up from the same period last year, 
but contacts reported that changes in immigration policy 
slowed international arrivals markedly. The possibility of 
increases in infrastructure spending boosted demand for 
engineering services. Demand for business consulting 
The Beige Book ■ May 2017 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
services slowed somewhat, and contacts noted that any 
optimism regarding potential federal government policies 
to reduce corporate tax burdens had not translated into 
increased investment in many industries.   
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity picked up to a mod-
est pace during the reporting period. In the aerospace 
and defense industry, capacity utilization improved mod-
estly. Deliveries of commercial aircraft slowed somewhat 
from the same period in the previous year, but new 
orders doubled. Credit demand from manufacturers 
picked up, and a few contacts reported that previously 
delayed investments were moving forward. Increased 
investment spending in the manufacturing sector and 
continued strength in residential construction lifted the 
demand for steel and fabricated metals. Sales of semi-
conductors stayed strong; however, concerns remained 
over the elevated dollar and potential changes in trade 
policy. Contacts reported that manufacturers’ demand for 
energy in eastern Washington was flat.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector were mixed. A wet 
winter in much of the West boosted water supplies and 
improved crop yields. However, cool wet weather de-
layed some plantings in Idaho. One contact in the Moun-
tain West noted that credit demand from the agriculture 
sector softened as overall growing conditions remained 
challenging and yields were down somewhat. Demand 
from canneries for tomatoes softened, and the number of 
new tomato plantings is expected to decline. While con-
tacts in the agricultural export sector reported optimism 
that rising global demand would boost overall sales, they 
continued to express concerns over competition from 
foreign producers and the still elevated dollar.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate market activity continued to grow at a strong 
pace, but activity varied by region. Residential construc-
tion activity remained strong in urban centers but slowed 
to a moderate pace in some rural regions, due in part to 
especially wet ground conditions in areas of the Moun-
tain West. Permits for single and multi-family units edged 
up, but contacts noted that construction was somewhat 
hampered by shortages of available land in some areas. 
Supply shortages and strong demand continued to fuel 
rapid home price growth in most parts of the District; 
contacts in urban centers reported that bids routinely 
came in significantly above the asking prices. Demand 
for commercial real estate loans in California remained 
strong.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity continued to grow at a moderate pace 
over the reporting period. In parts of the Northwest, loan 
demand jumped after a slow start to the year. Demand 
for automobile loans slowed. A few contacts reported 
increased use of personal credit lines. Deposit growth 
continued to expand at a moderate pace. Delinquency 
rates for automobile loans increased, but overall credit 
quality remained at a high level. A few contacts reported 
that increased competition among lenders contributed to 
a softening of loan standards. Liquidity remained ample. 
■


