The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
October 21, 2020 
October 2020 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
based on information collected on or before October 9, 2020. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve oﬃcials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to increase across all Districts, with the pace of growth characterized as slight to modest in 
most Districts. Changes in activity varied greatly by sector. Manufacturing activity generally increased at a moderate 
pace. Residential housing markets continued to experience steady demand for new and existing homes, with activity 
constrained by low inventories. Banking contacts also cited increased demand for mortgages as the key driver of over-
all loan demand. Conversely, commercial real estate conditions continued to deteriorate in many Districts, with the 
exception being warehouse and industrial space where construction and leasing activity remained steady. Consumer 
spending growth remained positive, but some Districts reported a leveling off of retail sales and a slight uptick in tour-
ism activity. Demand for autos remained steady, but low inventories have constrained sales to varying degrees. Re-
ports on agriculture conditions were mixed, as some Districts are experiencing drought conditions. Districts character-
ized the outlooks of contacts as generally optimistic or positive, but with a considerable degree of uncertainty. Restau-
rateurs in many Districts expressed concern that cooler weather would slow sales, as they have relied on outdoor 
dining. Banking contacts in many Districts expressed concern that delinquency rates may rise in coming months, citing 
various reasons; however, delinquency rates have remained stable. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment increased in almost all Districts, though growth remained slow. Employment gains were reported most 
consistently for manufacturing firms, although firms continued to report new furloughs and layoffs. Most Districts contin-
ued reporting tight labor markets, attributing it to workers’ health and childcare concerns, with many firms consequently 
offering increased schedule flexibility; a few Districts, however, noted some firms were finding it easier to hire workers. 
Wages increased slightly in most Districts, often tied to firms’ difficulty finding workers, especially for low-wage or high-
demand jobs. Some firms reported returning wages (and raises) to normal levels, but many reported more stable  
wages. 
Prices 
Prices rose modestly across Districts since the previous report. Input costs generally increased faster than consumer 
prices; however, some sectors—notably construction, manufacturing, retail, and wholesale—passed along the higher 
costs to consumers. Overall, consumer prices across Districts rose modestly, with the notable exceptions of food,  
automobiles, and appliances, which increased significantly. Retail gasoline prices declined. Input costs increased at 
varying degrees, mostly led by increases in materials costs, particularly steel and lumber. Multiple Districts reported 
continued additional costs for firms due to COVID-19, including personal protective equipment, sanitation equipment, 
testing equipment, and technology needed for remote work. Changes in row crop prices were mixed, while Districts 
reported declines in prices for animal proteins.  
Boston 
Economic activity continued to improve during the end of 
August through September. Revenues of responding 
firms were generally ahead of the year-earlier period, 
albeit not strongly. Housing markets saw strong demand 
and limited supply, leading to home price increases. 
Outlooks were mostly positive, but contacts expressed 
considerable uncertainty. 
 
New York 
The regional economy has grown slightly in recent 
weeks, with activity still well below pre-pandemic levels. 
Manufacturing, housing markets, and tourism have all 
picked up somewhat, while consumer spending has 
leveled off. Employment and wages have held steady. 
Selling prices have been little changed, on balance, 
though more firms plan to raise their prices in the months 
ahead. 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Business activity grew slightly during the current Beige 
Book period but remained well below levels attained 
prior to the onset of COVID-19. Employment sustained a 
modest rebound, while wages rose slightly and firms 
struggled to attract workers. Prices also rose modestly 
amid price spikes. With the pandemic ongoing and the 
stimulus ended, uncertainty remained extremely high in 
anticipation of layoffs, foreclosures, and bankruptcies. 
Cleveland 
The Fourth District economy expanded at a moderate 
pace, and more firms increased staffing to keep up with 
rebounding demand. However, labor shortages persist-
ed, with many workers sitting out of the labor force. 
While firms expect conditions to improve further in com-
ing months, elevated uncertainty resulted in many firms’ 
opting to hold cash and forgo capital expenditures. 
Richmond 
The Fifth District economy expanded modestly in recent 
weeks, but economic activity was below pre-pandemic 
levels. Employment rose, as demand for part-time and 
temporary workers increased, but wages and prices held 
fairly steady. Shipments and manufacturing activity 
increased, and the housing market was strong, but com-
mercial real estate and lending were soft, and the hospi-
tality market remained weak. 
Atlanta 
Economic activity improved somewhat. Labor market 
conditions improved modestly, and nonlabor costs were 
generally stable. Retail activity was soft. Activity in tour-
ism and hospitality remained muted. Residential real 
estate demand increased, and home prices rose. Com-
mercial real estate conditions stabilized. Manufacturing 
activity improved. Conditions at financial institutions 
stabilized. 
Chicago 
Activity increased robustly, but growth slowed and activi-
ty remained below pre-pandemic levels. Employment 
and consumer spending increased robustly; manufactur-
ing increased moderately; construction and real estate 
increased modestly; and business spending increased 
slightly. Wages increased slightly and prices rose mod-
estly. Financial conditions were little changed. Rising 
prices lifted farm income. 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Reports from contacts suggest economic activity has 
increased slightly but remains highly variable across 
sectors. Auto dealers continued to report strong sales 
despite inventory shortages. Restaurants reported some 
improvement but expect activity to decline due to cooler 
weather. Most District crop yields and production are up 
significantly over the prior year, with only cotton produc-
tion lower. 
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew slightly. Employ-
ment was flat overall, but volatile, with many firms either 
adding or cutting workforce. Labor availability tightened, 
and wages gained some traction. Growth continued in 
manufacturing and residential construction and real 
estate. But most other sectors were either flat or down; 
agriculture conditions improved thanks to a good crop 
outlook, but remained weak due to low prices. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity continued to increase in September, 
albeit at a slower pace than during the summer months. 
Consumer spending declined modestly, with drops in 
retail, auto, restaurant, and tourism sales. However, 
activity rose in the manufacturing, residential real estate, 
wholesale trade, and transportation sectors. In addition, 
the energy sector stabilized somewhat and the agricul-
ture sector improved slightly.  
Dallas 
Growth in the Eleventh District economy picked up pace, 
particularly in services and manufacturing, though activi-
ty remained well below normal levels. The housing mar-
ket continued to perform well. Energy activity remained 
depressed but started to show some signs of improve-
ment. Outlooks were largely positive but highly uncer-
tain, particularly with regard to the presidential election 
and the unknown trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded mod-
erately. Employment levels increased modestly, while 
price inflation rose marginally. Sales of retail goods rose 
noticeably, while conditions in the consumer and busi-
ness services sectors improved somewhat. Manufactur-
ing expanded moderately, and conditions in the agricul-
ture sector improved modestly. Residential real estate 
activity increased further, while the commercial market 
was broadly unchanged. Lending picked up at a fair 
pace. 

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business contacts in the First District reported activity continued to improve from mid-August through September, amid 
ongoing pandemic disruptions. Although overall activity levels were still below average, most responding manufacturers 
and retailers reported increased revenues compared with a year ago. Revenues at contacted software firms were also 
up modestly from 2019. Commercial real estate markets continued to diverge, with industrial and lab space doing well, 
and retail and office in the doldrums. Residential real estate contacts cited strong demand and limited inventory, causing 
home and condo sales prices to rise. Outlooks were mixed, although mostly somewhat positive, with uncertainty the 
watchword. 
Employment and Wages  
Reports on hiring varied. One retail contact still has 
workers on furlough but also reported difficulty hiring 
warehouse workers; they have permanently increased 
warehouse worker pay as well as adding additional 
temporary pay increases from September through De-
cember to support added holiday demands. Two-thirds 
of manufacturing contacts said they were hiring. Several 
indicated labor market pressure had eased in recent 
weeks and they were getting more job applicants. One 
software firm reported its headcount up 5 percent year-
over-year reflecting a recently finalized acquisition; they 
will finalize another acquisition in the coming weeks. 
That firm also continued hiring for all business functions. 
By contrast, another software contact noted that while 
scheduled retirements continued, they were not hiring 
replacements for any roles, so headcounts were down 
slightly. Software respondents said annual wage increas-
es continued on schedule and they implemented no 
wage cuts or layoffs due to COVID-19.  
Prices  
Contacts again said little about prices. Manufacturers 
reported that pricing pressure was limited. Two contacts 
in the paper business said the cost of inputs and their 
selling prices had both gone up. A drug manufacturer 
said they were postponing an annual price increase 
because of COVID. Software firms do not anticipate any 
changes in prices in the coming months. 
Retail and Tourism 
Retail respondents continued to report major disruptions 
related to COVID-19, though several retailers cited 
strong recoveries through the summer and into fall. One 
clothing seller said store foot traffic was down 30 percent 
compared to the same period last year, but a higher 
conversion rate and strong online sales led to an in-
crease in total September sales of almost 15 percent 
from year-earlier. An online retailer noted sustained year
-over-year growth, albeit decelerating compared to the 
spring. This contact expects strong e-commerce holiday 
sales but is concerned about delivery delays, as many 
couriers are already strained by the increased volume of 
online shopping. Automobile sales remained strong; a 
northern New England contact reported the strongest 
summer on record for sales of automobiles, RVs, and 
power sports equipment.  
Travel industry contacts reported that in one coastal 
area, hotels reported their best August on record, and for 
the season they were down a better-than-anticipated 12 
percent; short-term rentals were up 5 percent compared 
to 2019. Restaurants there reported that September was 
close to normal, although many restaurants that usually 
close for the winter closed earlier than usual this year 
due to added restrictions and slimmer profit margins. 
Restaurants staying open reported difficulty sourcing 
winterized tents and propane heating units to continue 
serving outside. Airline passenger counts into Boston 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
remained down more than 80 percent into the start of 
fall, an improvement from earlier this spring. International 
passenger counts were down 90 percent; only half the 
international routes are currently operating.  
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Five of six firms responding this cycle reported sales 
growth from a year ago. The one exception was a paper 
producer reporting that gains in grocery and mail order 
offset a slowdown in orders from retailers. A drug firm 
reported increased sales but said they were held back by 
people’s continued reluctance to get medical care during 
the pandemic. A producer of frozen fish said sales re-
mained extremely strong and that it was contracting 
some production to frozen fish producers who sold most-
ly to restaurants and now have excess capacity. A toy 
producer said that limits on production of new movies 
hurt demand for their products. 
No contacts reported significant revisions to capital 
spending plans. The toy maker said they were reas-
sessing their need for office space because of the suc-
cess of remote work arrangements. Outlooks were gen-
erally positive among manufacturing respondents. A 
diversified manufacturer with substantial military busi-
ness said their COVID slowdown was more or less over. 
Software and IT Services 
Software firms responding this round saw slight positive 
growth in the last quarter; most contacts anticipated 
ending the year with revenues up 3 percent to 5 percent 
over last year. For one medical software contact, new 
bookings remained at 30 percent of the previous year’s 
level; they have relied on their backlog to sustain them 
during this time. All contacts reported that operating 
expenses were down, mostly due to moving to a virtual 
setting for customer visits and marketing events; they 
anticipate that these virtual interactions may continue 
even once public health concerns have abated. 
Contacts expressed confidence that they have adapted 
well to what they believe will be the state of the industry 
through mid-2021. While some felt that the national 
economy remained uncertain, they were more optimistic 
regarding their own firm’s performance  
Commercial Real Estate 
Industrial and lab space markets in the First District 
continued to do well, while retail and office continued to 
struggle. The industrial market, particularly anything 
having to do with logistics, was operating at near capaci-
ty, and prices and rents increased as a result. Lab space 
continued to be in high demand, so investment in these 
types of buildings hasn’t slowed. Retail spaces continued 
to struggle, notwithstanding states’ advancing reopening 
plans. Contacts reported that shopping centers with 
essential businesses such as grocery and home im-
provement stores, were doing well in terms of rent col-
lection, but malls and lifestyle stores were doing much 
worse, with rent collection as low as 20 percent in some 
cases. The retail vacancy rate has increased.  
Office market activity was still only as-needed, mainly 
renewing expiring leases. Tenants requested short-term 
extensions; while they received some concessions, face-
value rents remained mostly unchanged. Most contacts 
estimated that about 20 percent of workers are working 
from offices now; while this is an increase from August’s 
10 percent estimate, the post-Labor Day rise was not as 
large as anticipated.  
Contacts were mostly pessimistic regarding the outlook 
for the rest of 2020 and the beginning of 2021, largely 
citing political uncertainty and confusion around future 
stimulus measures. Many contacts said that without 
further stimulus measures, landlords may not be able to 
continue covering for their more-affected tenants, so 
evictions and vacancy rates may increase. Some con-
tacts also noted that in order for older office spaces to 
recover post-COVID, many infrastructure improvements 
will be needed. 
Residential Real Estate 
High prices and substantial inventory shortages charac-
terized residential real estate markets in the First District. 
(Connecticut data were unavailable. Vermont reported 
changes from July 2019 to July 2020; all other areas 
reported year-over-year changes to August 2020.) The 
inventory of homes for sale dropped by double-digit 
percentages from a year ago in all reporting markets 
except Boston condos. In Massachusetts and New 
Hampshire, the inventory of single family homes de-
creased by over 55 percent. The median sale price rose 
in all markets, with double-digit increases for single 
family homes. Changes in closed sales varied by market, 
largely reflecting available inventory. Contacts said they 
did not expect the usual fall and winter slowdown this 
year. Pent-up demand from the delayed spring market 
as well as the desire to take advantage of historically low 
interest rates have fueled the current buying frenzy. 
While there has been some increase in seller activity, it 
is failing to match demand. Both the Boston and Massa-
chusetts contacts continued to observe movement from 
urban areas to suburban and rural locations, with work-
from-home arrangements becoming longer term.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional‐economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District economy grew slightly in the latest reporting period, as the pace of re-opening 
has been gradual and the virus spread has remained subdued across most of the District. Employment has been steady 
overall, with some industries adding jobs but others reducing headcounts. Input prices continued to rise moderately, 
while selling prices were little changed. Consumer spending has flattened out, while tourism has picked up somewhat 
but remains depressed. Housing markets have been mixed but, on balance, somewhat stronger, while markets for office 
and retail space have softened further. Commercial construction activity has remained depressed, though residential 
construction has shown scattered signs of picking up. Finally, banks reported increased demand for commercial and 
home mortgages, tighter credit standards, and a downward shift in delinquency rates for commercial and residential 
mortgages. Overall, business contacts have become somewhat less optimistic about the near-term outlook. 
.  
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has been steady, on balance, in recent 
weeks. Manufacturers, wholesalers, and leisure & hospi-
tality firms have reported some net hiring, whereas con-
tacts in the information, transportation, and construction 
sectors have reported modest staff reductions. A major 
upstate New York employment agency noted a pickup in 
hiring, particularly for manufacturing and customer sup-
port jobs. A New York City agency specializing in office 
jobs noted scattered hiring in the financial sector but 
characterized the job market overall as sluggish, with 
many job-seekers laid off from retail and hospitality. This 
contact also noted that many companies are still largely 
operating remotely and are reluctant to on-board new 
staff to work from home. 
Business contacts in most sectors said they plan to 
increase staffing levels in the months ahead, with the 
most widespread gains anticipated among manufactur-
ers. In contrast, more transportation & warehousing firms 
plan to reduce than expand employment.   
Wages have edged up overall, except in the information 
sector, where contacts mostly reported flat to declining 
wages. Looking ahead, businesses generally expect 
wages to accelerate modestly—particularly in the trade & 
transportation sector.  
Prices  
Business contacts reported that input costs continued to 
rise moderately. In particular, contacts involved in con-
struction noted sharply increasing prices for lumber and 
other construction materials. A number of contacts noted 
that, aside from the prices of inputs, they have incurred 
additional costs in adapting to new safety concerns and 
complying with regulations. Retailers and wholesalers 
reported some increases in selling prices, but business-
es in other sectors indicated that selling prices were little 
changed. Looking ahead, somewhat more contacts than 
in recent months indicated plans to raise their selling 
prices—most notably, in the retail sector.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending showed signs of leveling off since 
the last report.  Retailers reported that sales grew at a 
subdued pace in recent weeks, as restrictions continued 
to be gradually eased, though business remained well 
below pre-pandemic levels.  Stores in upstate New York 
tended to outperform those in other areas.  
New vehicle sales softened further in the latest reporting 
period, with sales down from brisk summer levels, ac-
cording to dealers in upstate New York. This continued 
pullback is largely attributed to low inventories, though 
one contact noted that inventory levels picked up starting 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
in late September. Sales of used vehicles have held up 
better due to less pronounced inventory problems. Sepa-
rately, consumer confidence among New York State 
residents rose notably in September, reaching its highest 
level since the beginning of the pandemic.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Manufacturing activity has picked up in the latest report-
ing period, growing at a moderate pace.  Wholesale 
trade firms noted a brisk rebound in activity, which had 
been flat or declining since the onset of the pandemic. In 
contrast, contacts in the transportation & warehousing 
sectors continued to report weakening business activity, 
with some noting difficulties in replenishing inventories. 
Looking ahead, manufacturers and wholesalers re-
mained largely optimistic, while transportation & ware-
housing contacts have grown increasingly pessimistic.   
Services 
Service industry contacts generally reported that busi-
ness activity has been steady to slightly lower, after 
weakening during the late summer. Contacts in the 
professional & business services and education & health 
sectors reported steady activity, while those in leisure & 
hospitality and information reported slight declines. Ser-
vice firms generally indicated they do not expect activity 
to change significantly in the months ahead    
Tourism has shown scattered signs of a pickup. The 
more rural tourist destinations across the region have 
reportedly fared reasonably well.  New York City’s tour-
ism sector, in contrast, has been depressed, though 
there have been signs of modest improvement. Hotels 
have seen some pickup in occupancy, but a sizable 
proportion remain closed, and those that are open are 
still at somewhat below half capacity—with about half of 
that reflecting arrangements with the city to house the 
homeless. While business travel has remained mori-
bund, a pickup in weekend occupancies signals some 
return of leisure visitors—a trend that was also evident in 
strong attendance at the 9-11 memorial site and a mod-
est increase in visits to local museums. New York City 
restaurants, which benefited from a broad expansion in 
outdoor dining during the summer, have more recently 
been allowed to restart indoor dining with limited capaci-
ty—a change that occurred earlier on in the rest of the 
District. As the onset of cold weather inevitably reduces 
outdoor dining, many are concerned that demand for 
indoor dining will be limited by safety concerns. Movie 
theaters have reopened in New Jersey and Connecticut 
but remain closed in New York. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets have improved somewhat across much 
of the District. New York City’s sales and rental markets 
have continued to weaken, while markets elsewhere—
particularly for single-family homes—have been increas-
ingly robust. New York City’s rental vacancy rate has 
surged to a multi-decade high, and rents have fallen by 
roughly 10 percent from pre-pandemic levels, as landlord 
concessions have become more common. Demand for 
smaller units has fallen particularly sharply.  Rents and 
rental vacancy rates across the rest of the District have 
generally been stable.  
The residential sales market has been mixed. Sales of 
Manhattan condos and co-ops have been sluggish and 
running nearly 50 percent lower than a year earlier, while 
the listing inventory has risen sharply; still, prices have 
been reasonably steady thus far. Across the rest of the 
District—even in other parts of New York City and the 
metro area—inventories have fallen to low levels and 
prices have climbed.  Sales volume has risen but contin-
ues to be constrained by limited supply. In some areas, 
bidding wars were reported to be increasingly common.   
Commercial real estate markets have weakened further. 
Office availability and vacancy rates have risen sharply 
in New York City and moderately across the rest of the 
District. Similarly, office rents have declined noticeably in 
New York City, running about 8 percent lower than a 
year ago. Across the rest of the District, office rents were 
steady to down modestly. Retail vacancies have contin-
ued to increase, and asking rents have declined further.    
New construction activity has remained sluggish and well 
below year-earlier levels. Single-family construction has 
increased somewhat in recent months, while multifamily 
construction has remained sluggish, and commercial 
construction has been particularly depressed. Contacts 
in real estate and construction expressed increasing 
concern about the near term outlook . 
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
increased demand for residential and commercial mort-
gages but little change in demand for other categories of 
loans. Refinancing activity increased. Bankers reported 
some tightening in credit standards on commercial mort-
gages but stable credit standards across all other cate-
gories. Delinquency rates declined for residential and 
commercial mortgages but remained stable for consum-
er and commercial & industrial loans. Finally, bankers 
reported increasingly lenient policies for delinquent ac-
counts across all categories.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/regional‐economy 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Third District business activity incrementally improved during the current Beige Book period but remained well below 
levels observed prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The number of COVID-19 cases had been manageable 
but began rising late in the period. Net employment continued to grow modestly, but the rate of permanent layoffs has 
persisted as well. On balance, wages continued to grow slightly, and many contacts continued to report difficulties at-
tracting workers. Prices rose modestly – driven primarily by price spikes amid disruptions to production and distribution. 
Modestly positive expectations for growth over the next six months have broadened among firms. However, extreme 
uncertainty is uniformly expressed, with contacts citing rising COVID-19 cases, colder weather, rising layoffs, the failure 
to renew stimulus measures, a divisive political climate, and the consequences after moratoriums on evictions and 
foreclosures expire. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased modestly overall as firms contin-
ued hiring; however, recalls ebbed for previously fur-
loughed workers, while new furloughs and permanent 
layoffs persisted. Among firms responding to our COVID-
19 survey, 35 percent reported that they had hired new 
workers in September – up from 31 percent in August 
and 25 percent in July. Likewise, our mid-September 
surveys indicated somewhat stronger hiring among all 
types of firms than in the prior month. 
Recalls of furloughed workers have slowed – to 5 per-
cent in September from 13 percent in July. Meanwhile, 
the share of firms issuing permanent layoffs edged up to 
7 percent in September from 6 percent in July, while the 
share issuing new furloughs edged down to 5 percent 
from 6 percent.  
Staffing firms reported that activity continued to increase 
but tended to remain below pre-pandemic levels by 10–
15 percent. Staffing contacts continued to note more 
orders than they can fill with available labor. In our 
COVID-19 survey, fewer firms noted impediments to 
hiring in late September than in late August. Lack of 
childcare and expanded unemployment benefits were 
cited by just over one-fourth of the firms, while fear of 
infection was cited by just under one-fourth. One manu-
facturer noted that it has provided onsite childcare for 
over 25 years – largely removing that barrier. Some firms 
continue to note offering wage and benefit packages 
sufficient to retain their workforce with little turnover.  
Wages continued to grow slightly. In mid-September, the 
percentage of nonmanufacturing firms reporting higher 
wage and benefit costs per employee remained some-
what higher than the percentage reporting lower costs. 
However, nearly two-thirds of the firms reported no 
change.  
Prices  
Prices appeared to rise modestly, as about 25 percent of 
all contacts reported higher prices for their own goods 
and services and for their inputs to production. However, 
over 60 percent of all firms noted no change in prices.  
Most contacts were not worried about rising inflation. 
Instead, contacts continued to describe scarcity, delays, 
and spotty price hikes because of intermittent demand 
shifts, production disruptions, and logistics problems. 
Contacts noted that California wildfires have caused food 
prices to spike; builders continued to note numerous 
prices hikes (and delays) for lumber, appliances, and 
other critical inputs.  
Manufacturing 
On balance, manufacturing activity has grown slightly 
since the prior period but may have leveled off during 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
September. At the end of July, manufacturing firms 
responding to our COVID-19 survey reported that sales 
and new orders were about 14 percent below what had 
been anticipated pre-pandemic. At the end of August 
and September, firms reported demand was about 8 
percent below pre-pandemic expectations.  
Diffusion indexes for shipments and for new orders from 
our mid-month surveys also suggested growth. Both 
indexes had risen since mid-August, indicating that 
growth was more widespread among firms and that the 
overall direction of change was positive.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retail sales improved incrementally 
over the period but remained below contacts’ pre-
pandemic expectations by 5–10 percent, depending on 
the retail segment (restaurants were on the low end or 
lower). Restaurants continue to survive with a mix of sit-
down dining, takeout/delivery, catering, and groceries. 
Contacts anticipate weaker sales in the coming winter 
months.  
Strong demand persisted for auto sales – new and used; 
however, inventory constraints limited new car sales to 
modest growth. Still, new car sales were less than 5 
percent below the prior year, which marked a significant 
improvement. Dealers did note that they are seeing more 
credit-challenged customers, resistance from bank lend-
ers, delinquencies, and repossessions.  
Tourism changed little compared with the prior period as 
a whole but did grow softer with the move from summer 
to fall. In the first half of August, activity had improved to 
about 39 percent below prior-year levels but was averag-
ing 47 percent below in late September. Contacts de-
scribed mixed results for the summer: Rental homes 
were doing well, while some hotels struggled, and some 
restaurants were busy, while others never reopened. 
Attractions, business travel, and urban destinations 
remain depressed.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, nonmanufacturing activity has grown slightly 
since the prior period, but mostly leveled off during Sep-
tember. At the end of July, nonmanufacturers in our 
COVID-19 survey had reported that sales and new or-
ders were about 21 percent below what had been antici-
pated pre-pandemic. At the end of August and Septem-
ber, firms reported demand was 16.7 percent and 16.2 
percent below pre-pandemic expectations, respectively.  
Diffusion indexes for new orders and sales from our mid-
month surveys also suggested slight growth. Both index-
es had edged down since mid-August but remained 
positive, indicating that growth was slightly less wide-
spread among firms but that the overall direction of 
change remained positive.  
Financial Services 
The volume of bank lending grew modestly during the 
period (not seasonally adjusted); in the same period in 
2019, by contrast, loan volumes grew robustly. Residen-
tial mortgages and other consumer loans grew moder-
ately during the period, and auto loans and commercial 
real estate lending grew modestly. However, these gains 
were offset by moderate declines in home equity lines 
and steep declines in commercial and industrial loans. 
Credit card volumes rose slightly; last year, they were 
essentially flat over the same period.  
Banking contacts, as well as accountants and attorneys, 
noted little change in delinquencies or other credit prob-
lems. However, most remained concerned that signifi-
cant problems would arise without renewed government 
stimulus and as moratoriums on evictions and foreclo-
sures expire.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported robust sales relative to a year 
earlier, while existing home sales grew modestly, as 
extremely low inventories continued to constrain sales. 
Builders and brokers alike noted that strong demand 
persisted because of low interest rates, a pandemic-
driven desire for more space, and the emergence of 
more first-time buyers. Surging demand has enabled 
builders to raise prices to cover rising labor and com-
modity costs. For brokers, surging demand has spurred 
multiple offers and higher house prices for the limited 
available homes. Banking contacts are becoming wary of 
appraisals, and some appraisers are beginning to balk at 
the higher prices.  
Activity in Philadelphia’s commercial real estate con-
struction sector essentially held steady at about 10–15 
percent below the level of activity anticipated before the 
pandemic. Production remains constrained by crew-size 
reductions for worker safety. Commercial office leasing 
activity continued to edge lower. With many workers 
remote and potential layoffs ahead, firms continued to 
delay leasing decisions; some are terminating leases. 
Demand remained strong for warehousing and positive 
for life science activities, but weak for retail space. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Fourth District economic activity increased at moderate pace since the last Beige Book report. The share of business 
contacts reporting an increase in customer demand was unchanged over the period; however, far fewer firms noted a 
decrease in demand. The general improvement was evident across broad industry breakouts, but there was considera-
ble variation within them. For example, spending on interest rate-sensitive goods (such as homes and light vehicles) 
was particularly robust, while spending in high-contact services segments (such as accommodation and food services) 
remained weak. The modest increase in customer demand was accompanied by an uptick in staffing levels. However, 
contacts suggested that hiring was difficult because of limited labor availability, which also exerted more upward pres-
sure on wages. Supply chain constraints and higher costs of freight and some materials pushed up input prices, and a 
greater share of contacts were able to increase selling prices. While most firms expect demand to increase further in 
coming months, capital spending remained soft as firms continue to hold on to cash amid persistent uncertainty sur-
rounding the pandemic. 
Employment and Wages  
Staffing levels increased slightly since the last report, 
although employment remained well below pre-
pandemic levels. More firms across a wide array of 
industries reportedly wanted to hire (or rehire) additional 
workers to meet improving demand. However, many 
indicated that they had a hard time adding workers. 
Contacts said that three primary factors contributed to 
their inability to hire: health concerns, difficulty arranging 
dependent care, and generous unemployment insurance 
benefits. Contacts were specifically asked if labor availa-
bility increased after the generous supplemental unem-
ployment insurance payments lapsed, and most said that 
it had not. There were a few exceptions noted by manu-
facturers, transportation firms, and restaurants. Never-
theless, the increase in labor availability was insufficient 
to meet these employers’ needs. Staffing services firms 
continued to report unusually large numbers of unfilled 
orders because of these shortages. Moreover, they and 
other business contacts suggested that some wage rates 
were rising as a consequence, particularly in lower-wage 
positions.    
Prices  
On balance, selling prices rose moderately during the 
latest Beige Book period. However, pricing power varied 
by sector. In consumer-facing segments, auto dealers, 
furniture retailers, and apparel stores were among those 
reporting that customers were paying higher prices. 
Freight haulers said that strong demand, especially for 
last-mile delivery, was pushing up both spot and contract 
rates. By contrast, firms in professional and business 
services indicated that prices to customers were flat to 
down, with one noting that customers were “fragile” and 
had little appetite for higher prices. 
Nonlabor input costs also rose for many firms. Construc-
tion and manufacturing firms reported rising freight rates 
and materials prices, along with supply chain interrup-
tions, that contributed to higher input costs. Many of 
those firms were able to push such cost increases 
though to their customers. Contacts in a variety of sec-
tors suggested that adapting their operations to account 
for COVID-19 also added to their costs.    
Consumer Spending 
Reports from retailers suggest that consumer spending 
increased modestly during the last two months. Auto 
dealers said that sales remained strong in August and 
September, and many suggested that sales would have 
been even stronger if not for unusually low inventories. 
General merchandisers and apparel retailers said that 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
sales flattened out in recent months even though cus-
tomers seemed more willing to shop in brick-and-mortar 
stores. Hoteliers noted some improvement in occupancy 
rates relative to those of a few months ago, although 
they remained low. Looking ahead, contacts noted cau-
tious optimism that consumer spending will continue to 
recover but expressed some concern about this given 
uncertainty regarding the path of the virus and the future 
of fiscal stimulus.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing orders increased moderately. Several 
contacts attributed stronger orders to customers’ replen-
ishing inventories that were depleted earlier in the year. 
Others said that increased auto production as well as 
growing foreign demand, especially from China, contrib-
uted to their partial recovery. However, several contacts 
emphasized that activity remained below pre-pandemic 
levels. Looking forward, almost two-thirds of manufactur-
ing contacts believed demand will increase over the next 
quarter, although uncertainty about the path of the virus 
and the upcoming presidential election persisted.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential construction and real estate activity re-
mained strong since our last report. Many contacts said 
that favorable interest rates and low inventories have 
persuaded many consumers to go forward with home 
purchases. One real estate agent noted that sales did 
not decline after Labor Day as they usually do, and 
contacts noted that while they anticipate that demand will 
soften in the coming months, they think demand will be 
stronger than is typical for fall. One builder reported that 
some potential homebuyers were pushed out of the 
market by higher home prices, a situation which resulted 
from low inventories and higher materials costs, particu-
larly for lumber.    
Demand for nonresidential construction was mixed. 
While public work remained weak, there was a slight 
uptick in private-sector projects. One general contractor 
reported that previously delayed projects began to move 
forward and that bidding activity had increased. For the 
most part, commercial realtors remained downbeat, 
citing a lack of interest in commercial space and financial 
hardship among small businesses and restaurants. By 
contrast, demand for industrial space remains strong. 
Looking forward, firms expected nonresidential construc-
tion and leasing activity to experience a typical seasonal 
deceleration as the winter months approach, but persis-
tent uncertainty may further slow construction decisions.  
Financial Services 
Overall, banking activity increased after going through a 
soft patch during the last reporting period. Contacts 
noted that demand for mortgages and auto loans re-
mained strong as low interest rates persisted, but de-
mand for business loans was flat on balance. Lenders 
said that delinquency rates for commercial and consum-
er loans were still relatively low because of forbearance 
agreements and various fiscal relief measures. However, 
a number of contacts reported slight increases in delin-
quencies of commercial loans as the economy remained 
weak and some deferral programs ended. Looking 
ahead, bankers expected loan demand to remain un-
changed throughout the current quarter but noted that 
uncertainty regarding the path of the virus clouded their 
outlook. Moreover, while bankers expressed surprise 
that they had not yet seen bigger increases in metrics 
reflecting financial duress, many expected them to rise in 
2021.    
Professional and Business Services 
Customer demand for professional and business ser-
vices remained strong, and no contacts reported a de-
crease in business activity. One contact indicated that 
his firm’s demand was picking up along with the broader 
economy, but his firm was also benefitting from some 
pent-up demand that built during the slower months 
earlier in the pandemic. The transition to remote work 
and online transactions has accelerated the need for 
new software solutions and increased cybersecurity 
measures. In spite of the recent strength in demand for 
professional and business services, a couple of contacts 
expressed concern that firms may begin to delay pur-
chases as a result of continued heightened uncertainty.   
Freight 
Demand for freight services increased over the reporting 
period, driven by an increase in e-commerce and ongo-
ing (and broadening) resumption in economic activity. 
Eighty percent of contacts reported demand had in-
creased in the last two months, and 70 percent expected 
demand to continue to increase during the fourth quarter, 
particularly because more consumers will be holiday 
shopping from home. Many firms have been unable to 
adequately respond to increased demand because hiring 
drivers is difficult, and freight prices have increased as a 
result.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
clevelandfed.org/region  

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Fifth District increased modestly since our last report but remained soft compared to pre-COVID 
and year-ago levels. Manufacturers saw a moderate increase in new orders and shipments, overall, but supply chain 
disruptions limited output and increased cost of production. Ports experienced a moderate rise in volumes, particularly 
of imports, as shipments neared year-ago levels. Trucking companies had strong growth in volumes, particularly of retail 
goods and noted tight capacity in the market. Retail sales showed modest growth as demand for home goods was 
strong, but customer traffic at brick-and-mortar stores remained soft. The travel and tourism industry saw modest im-
provement, but remained weak, as hotel occupancy rates were low. Residential home sales showed robust growth 
across price ranges, as inventories of both new construction and resales remained low. Commercial real estate leasing 
saw some declines, as retail was particularly weak. Bankers reported a moderate increase in loans, as demand for 
home mortgages remained strong, but commercial lending softened somewhat. Overall, demand for nonfinancial ser-
vices increased slightly, as most firms reported flat to improving sales. Employment rose in recent weeks but remained 
below year-ago levels, and some businesses struggled to find workers. Price growth was fairly stable but varied across 
industries, as some firms noted increased costs of raw materials.   
Employment and Wages  
Total employment continued to rise in recent weeks, but 
the level of employment remained well below pre-
pandemic and year-ago levels. A staffing and recruiting 
company said that demand for temporary and part-time 
workers remained somewhat elevated but demand for 
direct placement was very low. An employer of hourly 
workers remarked that it was very hard to find workers, 
particularly for positions paying less than $20 an hour. 
Many businesses said that they were offering flexible 
scheduling and remote work opportunities to workers 
with children schooling at home. Wages were little 
changed, overall, but there were some reports of recent 
wage gains in industries with significant order backlogs.     
Prices  
Price growth remained modest, overall, since our previ-
ous report. According to our most recent surveys, manu-
facturers reported a slight slowdown in growth of prices 
received while service sector firms reported a modest 
acceleration. Businesses in both sectors reported a 
small increase in prices paid. Some manufacturing and 
construction firms noted supply shortages and rising 
prices for certain raw materials. Several businesses 
reported longer lead times and higher prices for person-
al protection equipment.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers in the Fifth District reported a moderate 
increase in shipments and new orders in recent weeks. 
Food, furniture, and appliances were strong, with de-
mand often exceeding capacity. Manufacturers who had 
shifted to making hospital gowns, sneeze guards, or 
other COVID-related equipment saw strong demand. 
However, manufacturers for retail stores struggled. Sup-
ply chain disruptions and tariffs put continued pressure 
on costs of inputs while unavailability of workers con-
strained production. Many contacts were cautious about 
investment because of uncertainty from the virus and the 
election year, but one West Virginia contact planned to 
expand factory space to increase capacity.    
Ports and Transportation 
Fifth District ports observed a moderate increase in 
shipping volumes since our last report. Many contacts 
reported volumes exceeded expectations from the 
spring. Import levels remained above export levels and 
grew faster than exports. Both import and export auto-
motive shipments were strong, as were consumer 
goods, with one contact noting high volumes of toy ship-
ments. Imports from east Asia grew, but heavy equip-
ment was soft. Port contacts noted higher shipping rates, 
as some blank sailings limited capacity. An airport saw 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
strong cargo shipments of both imports and exports, 
while capacity on passenger flights was limited. 
Trucking companies reported strong growth in recent 
weeks. Capacity was tight as some companies had 
experienced closures. This shifted activity to the spot 
market, which saw rates reach record highs. Retail 
shipments for certain goods were high as some retailers 
looked to replenish inventories. Competition for drivers 
from companies developing their own delivery services 
led to some attrition and wage pressure. Contacts re-
ported some capital expenditures but remained cau-
tious, citing high uncertainty in the market.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Retail sales saw modest growth in recent weeks but 
remained soft compared to last year. Demand was 
somewhat mixed across products. Sales of home im-
provement goods and furniture remained strong. Cloth-
ing stores continued to struggle with low traffic and 
revenues in general, but they noted fairly strong sales of 
high-end clothing. Several retailers reported that inven-
tories were out of season as excess remained from the 
spring. Contacts also noted a shift in customer traffic 
from large malls to individual destination stores. Some 
business expressed concerns about cash flow after 
Paycheck Protection Program loans run out. 
Travel and tourism in the Fifth District increased modest-
ly since our last report but were below year-ago levels. 
Hotel occupancy rose slightly in some areas, but hotels 
still struggled with low prices and occupancy rates that 
cannot sustain business in the long run. Demand for 
short term rentals was solid, particularly in areas with 
outdoor attractions, away from cities. Restaurants strug-
gled, and some closed permanently. Restauranteurs 
expressed concerns about the effect of coming cold 
weather on demand for outdoor dining while indoor 
space remains limited or undesirable. Outdoor attrac-
tions saw strong demand but noted that capacity re-
strictions limited business.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Fifth District home sales growth remained robust in 
recent weeks. Demand for homes was strong across 
locations and price ranges. Inventories were low for both 
new construction and resales, and new construction 
remained strong. Prices rose, and days on the market 
fell. Realtors reported increasing numbers of offers 
made on homes. Customer traffic remained somewhat 
sluggish, but customers were eager to buy. Low mort-
gage rates incentivized buyers, but rapidly growing 
prices led to unpredictable appraisals. Realtors noted 
that buyers increasingly want homes with more land, 
home offices, pools, and rooms suitable for homeschool-
ing multiple children.  
Commercial real estate leasing declined slightly since 
our last report. Vacancy rates for both retail and office 
were up, while rental rates fell. Retail was particularly 
weak, as some stores and restaurants closed perma-
nently or were unable to pay rent. Office leasing was 
soft. Many office tenants asked for short term lease 
renewals while determining the space they will need in 
the future, and some looked to sublet office space. Built-
to-suit office construction was soft, and contacts did not 
see speculative office building. Multifamily leasing strug-
gled in some urban areas, as many tenants moved to the 
suburbs, but was fairly stable in less densely populated 
areas. Demand for industrial space exceeded supply, 
leading to high rent and increasing construction.  
Banking and Finance 
Overall, respondents reported that loan activity picked up 
moderately for this period, mainly driven by continued 
strong demand for mortgage loans. On balance, they 
indicated conventional commercial lending declined 
slightly, especially in the hospitality and retail sectors. A 
few financial institutions stated that downward rate pres-
sure had squeezed their net interest margins. Deposit 
growth was moderate despite low rates on interest-
bearing accounts. Credit quality remained good, but a 
few respondents noted being more cautious in terms of 
their underwriting due to the pandemic. In addition, there 
is some concern that delinquencies may increase as a 
result of pending layoffs or furloughs.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Overall, demand for nonfinancial services increased 
slightly since our previous report. A majority of profes-
sional and business services firms reported flat to slightly 
improving sales and revenue. A few firms noted, howev-
er, that a slowdown in retail and office construction led to 
a decline in demand for their services. Health care ser-
vice providers reported little change in demand, but one 
clinic saw an increase in demand for virtual visits and 
was increasing capital spending on technology as a 
result.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/data_analysis 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions in the Sixth District improved slightly over the reporting period but remained below pre-COVID-19 
levels. Labor market activity improved modestly as employers continued to add to payrolls. Nonlabor costs remained 
generally muted, but costs related to construction and COVID-19 safety measures continued to rise. Retail sales grew 
but largely remained below year-earlier levels. Softness in tourism and hospitality persisted as COVID-19 restrictions 
continued to limit activity in many parts of the District. Residential real estate demand and home prices increased while 
inventory levels remained tight. Commercial real estate activity stabilized. Manufacturing activity increased and new 
orders and production levels rose. Banking conditions stabilized, and loan loss reserves continued to grow. 
Employment and Wages  
Contacts reported modest improvements in labor market 
conditions since the last report. On balance, District 
employers continued to add to payrolls over the reporting 
period. Firms continued to slowly recall workers as de-
mand returned. However, several contacts reported that 
some prior staff cutbacks had become permanent, while 
others noted using attrition to shrink headcount. Many 
contacts indicated that the pool of available workers was 
ample and speculated that the expiration of the en-
hanced unemployment insurance benefit had begun to 
improve the supply of workers for lower-skilled positions. 
Employers remained concerned about workers’ abilities 
to balance workloads with the demands of childcare and 
the return to school, in person or virtual.  
Reports on wages and compensation varied among 
contacts. Some businesses rescinded salary cuts, while 
others maintained pay cuts and salary freezes. Wage 
increases remained concentrated at the low end of the 
pay scale. 
Prices  
Over the reporting period, contacts noted some rising 
input costs, particularly for lumber and steel. Expenses 
associated with personal protective equipment, testing, 
and sanitation practices to protect employees and cus-
tomers from COVID-19 remained significant, and in-
creased technology expenses for extended work-from-
home postures were also reported. Insurance costs were 
also cited as increasing. Pricing power remained muted, 
with little ability to pass through these costs. The Atlanta 
Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey showed 
year-over-year unit costs decreased significantly, from 
1.5 percent in August to 1.3 percent on average in Sep-
tember. Year-ahead expectations remained largely un-
changed at 1.6 percent. 
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Reports from retail contacts were little changed from the 
previous report. Sales relative to this time last year re-
mained soft but were better than expected with contin-
ued strength in home-related products. Contacts in Flori-
da and Louisiana anticipate an uptick in demand as 
those states implemented final phases of reopening. 
Contacts shared concerns for the upcoming holiday 
season sales period, citing political uncertainty and the 
potential for another spike in COVID-19 cases as poten-
tially hampering sales growth. 
Travel and tourism contacts reported that although de-
mand through the summer season was softer than a 
year ago, tourism activity through early October was 
recovering slowly.  COVID-19 restrictions continued to 
negatively impact the industry in most District states as 
hospitality contacts reported that group travel and con-
ference bookings continued to be postponed or can-
celled through the second quarter of 2021. 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
Construction and Real Estate 
Demand for housing continued to recover, and new 
home construction continued to fall short of demand. 
Inventory levels of existing homes dropped to historic 
lows and shortages are expected to remain a long-term 
market headwind. Limited supply and rising construction 
costs have led to increased upward pressure on prices. 
However, historically low interest rates continued to help 
offset rising prices. Contacts shared concerns over po-
tential higher mortgage defaults as surges in delinquen-
cies in markets such as Orlando and Miami were noted. 
Commercial real estate (CRE) contacts reported contin-
ued stabilization amidst improving employment condi-
tions and customer traffic. Hospitality, which was espe-
cially hard hit at the onset of the pandemic, was general-
ly stagnant. Retail remained challenged; however, con-
tacts reported marginal improvement as rent collections 
increased at poor performing shopping centers. The rate 
of unit leasing remained muted compared with pre-
pandemic rates. Owners of lower-price multifamily prop-
erties reported an increase in late rent payments and 
some softening in occupancies. While improving, low 
levels of tourism and travel were having a notable impact 
on activity across the hospitality and retail sectors. Due 
to slower transaction and leasing volumes, asset valua-
tion remained difficult. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts reported an increase in overall 
business activity since the previous report. Firms indicat-
ed that new orders and production levels rose, and sup-
ply delivery times increased. Finished inventory levels 
were also reported to have increased, after declining 
over the last three reporting periods. Expectations for 
future production levels rose, with half of contacts sur-
veyed expecting higher levels of production over the next 
six months. 
Transportation 
Transportation activity across the District improved over 
the reporting period. Trucking firms reported that ship-
ments of consumer staples and building materials re-
mained above pre-COVID-19 levels. Port contacts re-
ported significant growth in container traffic, driven by 
increases in e-commerce, and ocean carriers were oper-
ating at full capacity and reinstating vessels that were 
suspended as a result of the pandemic. Railroads report-
ed that overall traffic improved, intermodal shipments of 
consumer goods strengthened, and industrial freight 
volumes stabilized but were down from year-earlier 
levels. Inland waterway contacts noted that demand for 
barge services was below pre-pandemic levels, owing 
primarily to fewer shipments of domestically-produced 
refined products. 
Banking and Finance  
Conditions at financial institutions stabilized over the 
reporting period. Earnings remained pressured by com-
pressed net interest rate margins and higher provisions 
for loan losses. Persistently elevated deposit levels kept 
liquidity strong. Loan growth was flat as underwriting 
conditions remained tight for many loan products outside 
of portfolios such as residential real estate. Requests for 
additional forbearance on loan payments declined. 
Energy  
Hurricanes Laura and Sally made landfall within the 
District during the reporting period, causing supply dis-
ruptions as production, refining, and chemical processing 
activity stalled, according to energy contacts. Power 
generation, transmission, and distribution infrastructure 
in southwest Louisiana was severely damaged by Hurri-
cane Laura, leaving hundreds of industrial sites without 
power for a sustained period. Crude oil refiners contin-
ued to experience weak demand amidst a global inven-
tory glut. Refining contacts noted that utilization rates 
remained near historically low levels and are expected to 
remain low heading into the fall or until fuel prices rise 
enough to justify increasing output. Still, some energy 
contacts reported that large industrial petrochemical 
refining and chemical processing plant expansion pro-
jects that were delayed earlier in the year were gradually 
picking up again. Utilities contacts noted ongoing invest-
ment and integration of renewable energy resources. 
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions remained weak. While drought-
free conditions prevailed in most parts of the District, 
some producers reported crop and infrastructure dam-
age caused by Hurricanes Laura and Sally. The USDA 
reported that District farmland values were up on a year-
over-year basis except in Florida where cropland value 
was unchanged. Cotton, peanut, and rice harvesting 
progressed, though below the pace of their five-year 
averages, while soybean harvesting was near its five-
year average. The USDA reported that in August, year-
over-year prices paid to farmers were up for cotton, rice, 
soybeans, and milk, but down for corn, cattle, broilers, 
and eggs. On a month-over-month basis, prices in-
creased for rice, soybeans, and cattle but decreased for 
corn, cotton, broilers, eggs, and milk. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased robustly in late August and September, but the pace of growth was 
slower than the prior reporting period and activity remained well below its pre-pandemic level. Contacts expected further 
growth in the coming months, but most did not expect a full recovery until at least the second half of 2021. Employment 
and consumer spending increased robustly; manufacturing increased moderately; construction and real estate in-
creased modestly; and business spending increased slightly. Wages increased slightly and prices rose modestly. Finan-
cial conditions were little changed on balance. Rising prices and additional government support lifted expectations for 
farm income. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased robustly overall during the report-
ing period, though the pace of growth slowed. Further-
more, a number of contacts again reported little or no 
change to their staffing levels. Many retail contacts noted 
that they continued to operate with reduced hours and 
were holding staffing levels down accordingly. In spite of 
high unemployment, some contacts in manufacturing 
and agriculture reported that finding entry level workers 
was only a little easier than prior to the pandemic. Con-
tacts continued to report providing scheduling accommo-
dations to workers with young children. Wages increased 
slightly across skill levels, while benefits costs moved up 
modestly. 
Prices 
Prices increased modestly on balance in late August and 
September, and contacts expected a similar sized in-
crease over the next 12 months. Consumer prices in-
creased moderately, led by higher food and vehicle 
prices. Producer prices increased slightly. Input costs 
rose modestly, driven by rising prices for shipping and 
raw materials, particularly metals. Energy prices re-
mained weak, as inventories of natural gas and crude oil 
stayed elevated and demand remained slow. 
 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased robustly over the report-
ing period, though overall spending remained well below 
pre-pandemic levels. Nonauto retail sales increased 
moderately, led by growth in the home improvement, 
home furnishings, and appliance categories. Hobby and 
sporting good sales remained strong. Apparel sales were 
lackluster because of low demand for traditional back-to-
school wear. Growth in e-commerce eased but contin-
ued to register large gains from a year earlier. The pace 
of vehicle sales strengthened. Dealers indicated that 
inventories of new light trucks and many types of used 
vehicles continued to be tight, which supported rising 
prices and profit margins. Demand for auto repairs in-
creased significantly. Contacts in the leisure and hospi-
tality industry reported large increases in volumes, but 
activity remained well below its pre-pandemic level. 
Contacts noted that Labor Day air and hotel bookings 
were sharply off year-ago levels and that business travel 
continued to be weak. In a Michigan survey, the majority 
of restaurant operators believed they would not see 
sales return to pre-pandemic levels for at least 6 months.  
 
 
 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in late August and 
September. Retailers continued to struggle to maintain 
inventories for in-demand items such as home improve-
ment, home furnishings, and hobby goods because of 
supply constraints. A contact said that appliance short-
ages, especially of refrigerators, hampered multi-family 
building projects. Most manufacturers indicated that 
inventories were at comfortable levels, though a number 
of contacts continued to report minor supply chain prob-
lems. Capital expenditures were little changed, and 
many contacts again said they had paused expansion 
plans. Demand for transportation services increased 
modestly, with contacts noting that capacity constraints 
had led to sizeable price increases. Commercial energy 
consumption decreased slightly, but industrial energy 
consumption increased slightly. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased at a mod-
est pace over the reporting period. Residential construc-
tion grew modestly. Contacts noted that a lack of availa-
ble lots, material shortages, and rising lumber and dry-
wall prices were putting a damper on growth. Residential 
real estate activity remained vibrant, particularly in the 
single-family market. Home prices rose and inventories 
remained low. Nonresidential construction was flat over-
all and, as with residential construction, was experienc-
ing rising costs. A Southeast Michigan contact indicated 
that while there was solid demand for new industrial 
space, there was no new office or hospitality work. Com-
mercial real estate activity fell slightly overall, with deal 
making largely limited to industrial and multi-family prop-
erties. Warehouse and distribution space was in particu-
larly high demand. Commercial real estate prices fell 
modestly overall. Contacts also reported falling rents for 
office and retail spaces. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased moderately in late 
August and September, but remained below where it 
was before the pandemic began. Auto output continued 
to rebound and was near its pre-pandemic level. Steel 
production also continued to recover, but remained low. 
Demand for heavy machinery was higher than earlier in 
the year, but remained weak. Contacts noted that while 
demand for heavy machinery from the infrastructure 
segment remained solid, they were concerned about a 
drop-off in spending by state and local governments, 
many of which face potentially large budget cuts. Spe-
cialty metals manufacturers reported a modest increase 
in sales, with contacts highlighting growth in the con-
struction, medical, and defense industries. Demand for 
heavy trucks increased moderately. Manufacturers of 
building materials saw a modest increase in shipments, 
supported by growth in residential construction. Contacts 
in food processing reported strong growth and plans to 
expand capacity. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions were little changed on balance over 
the reporting period. Participants in the equity and bond 
markets reported little change in conditions overall, 
though volatility remained elevated. Business loan de-
mand decreased modestly, with contacts highlighting 
declines in the hospitality and commercial real estate 
sectors. One contact noted that commercial and industri-
al loan demand had started to come back because many 
businesses had used up their PPP funds. Business loan 
quality deteriorated modestly, with declines concentrated 
in leisure and hospitality and commercial real estate. 
Contacts reported that forbearances had ended for many 
customers and that there were few requests for exten-
sions. Standards again tightened some. Consumer loan 
demand increased modestly, led by continued mortgage 
refinancing activity. Loan quality improved slightly while 
standards tightened slightly. Contacts indicated that 
forbearances had ended in the consumer sector as well, 
with limited effects on portfolio quality. Contacts contin-
ued to report high levels of deposits for both businesses 
and households. 
Agriculture 
Rising prices for key agricultural commodities and addi-
tional government support lifted expectations for farm 
income for the year. Corn, soybean, and wheat prices 
moved higher, reflecting in part lower stocks compared 
with a year ago. Increases in corn and soybean exports, 
particularly to China, also supported prices. In addition, a 
dry August held back expected yields. Dairy prices were 
higher, supported by increased sales to food service 
establishments, and strong exports. Hog prices in-
creased while cattle prices decreased. There were re-
ports that improved income prospects had eased stress 
on agricultural borrowers somewhat, though concerns 
remained for next year, when government support was 
expected to drop substantially. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from District contacts suggest economic activity has increased slightly but the pace of activity remains highly 
variable across sectors. Employment and wages increased slightly. Auto dealers continued to report strong sales de-
spite inventory shortages. Restaurants reported some improvement but expect activity to decline due to cooler weather. 
District banking contacts reported that outstanding loan volumes decreased slightly compared with the previous survey 
period but remain well above year-ago levels. Home sales in most areas remain strong for this time of the year but have 
slowed in recent months. 
Employment and Wages  
Labor market conditions have improved slightly since the 
previous report, though the pace of job growth has 
slowed. Contacts across industries reported hiring or re-
hiring workers since July, especially in transportation, 
manufacturing, and healthcare. Firms seeking to hire 
workers reported a tight labor market, citing workers’ 
ongoing health concerns and family care responsibilities. 
One firm reported having to threaten furloughed employ-
ees’ healthcare benefits to pressure enough to return to 
work. Another firm estimated that 10% to15% of its 
workforce was absent daily. Other firms reported busi-
ness closures or emphasized stability more than growth. 
Employment trends for small firms were especially 
mixed. One Memphis contact reported several small 
business owners were seeking additional part-time jobs 
to cover their expenses, and aggregate data show little 
improvement in small business employment since July.  
Wages have grown slightly. Contacts reported increasing 
wages in the face of labor shortages or returning to 
normal salaries and wages as business normalized. 
Wages for small businesses remained more stable, with 
one survey finding no significant changes since our 
previous report. 
 
Prices  
Prices have increased moderately since the previous 
report. Contacts across industries reported higher input 
costs due to adding sanitization products and personal 
protective equipment as inputs. Crop prices have in-
creased moderately, except for rice, which has seen a 
slight decline. However, rice prices have increased mod-
erately year-over-year. Many raw materials are up mod-
erately, steel prices are up significantly, while chemical 
prices have declined. Contacts attribute elevated lumber 
prices to increased demand and a slowdown in produc-
tion as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. An agricul-
ture contact attributed the slight growth in cotton prices 
since the previous report to the first phase of a trade 
agreement between the U.S. and China. Contacts also 
noted that the prices of used cars remain elevated.  
Consumer Spending  
Reports from District general retailers, auto dealers, and 
hospitality contacts indicate that consumer spending 
activity has been mixed since our previous report. Sea-
sonally adjusted credit and debit card spending through 
the middle of September was mixed across the District. 
Consumers in West Tennessee have an improved out-
look relative to June and expect to spend about the 
same this year as they did last year. General retailers 
reported mixed business activity. District auto dealers 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
continued to report strong sales but have experienced 
inventory shortages. Tourism and hotel contacts contin-
ued to report business activity well below typical levels; 
most contacts reported constant business activity from 
late summer through early fall but expect a decline 
through the remainder of the year as cooler weather 
reduces outdoor dining. Restaurants continued to see 
increased sales; however, some restaurants that have 
maintained business through outdoor seating are plan-
ning temporary closures in the colder months. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has strongly increased since our 
previous report. Survey-based indexes suggest that 
manufacturing activity in Arkansas and Missouri strongly 
increased. In Arkansas, firms reported a strong uptick in 
new orders while production remained stable. In Missouri 
both new orders and production showed a strong uptick. 
Metal manufacturing contacts in the St. Louis area re-
ported 5% to 10% increases in production. Contacts 
reported that production is still below pre-COVID-19 
recession levels, but conditions are steadily improving. 
Fluctuations in demand were cited as impediments to 
further increases in production for these contacts. Con-
tacts in the furniture, military vehicle, and energy and 
defense products all reported that ongoing projects 
would considerably expand operations and employment 
over the next few years. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has increased 
since the previous report. Airport passenger traffic is up 
significantly, although it remains down more than 60% 
relative to this time last year. Cargo traffic is down slight-
ly since the previous report but remains up year-over-
year due to e-commerce. Logistics activity is mixed, with 
several package delivery firms hiring workers as the 
pandemic and oncoming holiday season increase vol-
ume. Other logistics contacts reported lower revenue 
year-over-year due to the pandemic and low oil produc-
tion, which have negatively impacted businesses that 
use their services. Hospital contacts reported revenue 
and patient volumes are increasing while costs per pa-
tient have increased due to higher staffing costs and 
PPE expenditures. Other healthcare contacts indicated 
that telehealth will likely become a larger part of the 
healthcare industry even after the pandemic.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has decreased slightly 
since the previous report. While home sales have recov-
ered from their lows in the spring, total sales in most of 
the largest District metro areas have been down slightly 
since mid-August. Home prices in the largest District 
metro areas have increased moderately since mid-
August. Contacts continued to report a shortage of hous-
ing on the market, with homes selling quickly once listed. 
Some contacts expressed concern about a future in-
crease in evictions when moratoria are lifted.  
Commercial real estate activity has been mixed since the 
previous report. Contacts reported that demand for office 
space has varied, with some tenants choosing to keep 
their current spaces or expand, while others are choos-
ing to move toward remote work on a more permanent 
basis. Contacts reported continued high demand for 
industrial space. A contact in Memphis noted that while a 
greater number of retail tenants have been able to pay 
rent compared with the spring, some are struggling to 
pay or have gone bankrupt.  
Commercial construction activity was mixed. Contacts 
reported little speculative activity or construction for 
office space, while construction for industrial space 
remained strong. Contacts reported delays with supply 
chains for materials and a lack of skilled labor. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have slightly weakened 
since the previous report. Overall loan demand contin-
ued to decline following the end of new PPP loans. Out-
standing loan volumes decreased slightly compared with 
the previous survey period but were well above year-ago 
levels. Growth in real estate and consumer loans fell 
modestly while commercial and industrial loan volumes 
slightly increased. Liquidity conditions remained strong 
due to high levels of deposits, despite lower rates on 
interest-bearing accounts. Delinquency rates remained 
relatively low; however, several contacts expressed 
continuing concerns for loans in the entertainment and 
leisure and hospitality sectors. Competition for loans and 
low interest rates is expected to narrow net interest 
margins and profitability. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agriculture conditions have slightly improved. Overall, 
contacts reported that year-to-date revenue remains 
steady or slightly up. The agribusiness sector has re-
mained steadier than most, but the effects have been 
diverse across the industry: Restaurant demand has 
been collapsing, but grocery spikes have been more 
than filling the shortfall. Most supply chain bottlenecks 
were early in the spring and have smoothed out in recent 
months. Overall, contacts expect business activity for the 
remainder of 2020 will remain steady or increase     
slightly. ■ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew slightly overall since the last report. Employment was mixed, with overall conditions 
remaining volatile. Wage pressures were modest, while price pressures were moderate. The District economy showed 
growth in manufacturing and residential construction and real estate. But consumer spending and tourism were flat 
overall, while activity slowed for professional services and commercial construction and real estate. Agricultural condi-
tions improved thanks to a promising crop outlook, but remained weak overall, and energy was stable at low levels.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment was mixed since the last report, and overall 
conditions remained quite volatile. Contacts suggested 
that some firms were in a “hiring chill,” with essential 
vacant jobs getting filled, but holding overall staffing 
levels in check. Initial unemployment claims over the 
most recent six-week period (through mid-September) 
fell significantly compared with the previous reporting 
period, but remained quite elevated compared with year-
ago levels. Continuing claims also dropped steeply over 
this relatively short period compared with mid-summer 
levels. Staffing contacts in Montana and North Dakota 
said job orders have grown in recent weeks, and labor 
availability was tightening. However, a survey of 
hospitality firms in Minnesota showed more firms were 
downsizing workforces compared with those that were 
increasing head count. Preliminary results of a larger, 
Districtwide survey in October showed similar results, 
and that trend was also expected to carry into the 
coming months. A Wisconsin contact said recruitment 
has become harder given pandemic constraints, and 
there’s “no doubt that automation has accelerated. Some 
lower-paying jobs probably won't be coming back.” Job 
postings improved slightly in recent weeks across most 
District states, though South Dakota saw a modest 
decline, and the overall growth trend has slowed notably 
from the pace seen in June and early July.   
Wage pressures rose modestly. A Districtwide survey in 
early October showed that a slightly higher share of firms 
have increased wages, and a lower share have 
decreased wages, compared with a similar July survey. 
Other, smaller ad hoc surveys in Minnesota, Wisconsin, 
and South Dakota showed generally similar results. 
Wage growth was slightly stronger among Minnesota 
hospitality firms, particularly in tourism regions seeing 
healthy labor demand. Firms across these various 
surveys also expected somewhat stronger wage growth 
in the future.     
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate since the previous 
report, though input price pressures appeared greater 
than final prices. According to preliminary results of a 
survey of District businesses, half of respondents 
reported that input prices were unchanged compared 
with pre-pandemic levels, though nearly one-third said 
input prices were up by 5 percent or more. Prices for 
final goods or services increased at a smaller share of 
firms. Prices for construction materials continued to 
increase rapidly. A panel of manufacturers reported that 
input prices had been rising faster than usual in August 
and September. Retail fuel prices in District states 
decreased slightly since the previous reporting period. 
Prices received by farmers in August increased from a 
year earlier for soybeans, wheat, potatoes, dry beans, 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
and turkeys, while prices for corn, hay, cattle, hogs, 
chickens, eggs, and milk decreased.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was flat since the last report. 
Surveys of retail and accommodation firms showed that 
while many were operating below pre-pandemic 
capacity, customer demand was still not outstripping 
available sales or service capacity. Growth in vehicle 
sales paused after a strong uptick earlier in the summer. 
A dealership with multiple locations in western District 
states saw sales decline significantly in August 
compared with a year earlier, and September sales were 
flat. Motor vehicle sales in Minnesota and Wisconsin 
were also lower, according to available data.  
Tourism experienced healthy late-summer activity in 
rural, high-amenity regions, but many firms in these 
areas worried about off-season business. Conversely, 
many larger cities continued to see low hotel occupancy 
rates and overall tourism activity. Air traffic was flat 
overall. After a modest late-summer increase in 
screened passengers at the eight largest District 
airports, activity fell slightly over September and was 
less than 40 percent of 2019 levels.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services sector decreased 
slightly since the last report. Firms providing services to 
clients in oil and gas and air transportation reported 
severe contraction in demand. Trucking contacts said 
that demand for freight transportation decreased 
recently. Providers of information technology services 
and consulting said business was steady, while 
broadband providers reported that demand was up 
significantly.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was moderately lower since the 
last report. In an October sample of several dozen 
construction firms, one-third saw a decrease in activity 
compared with earlier in the pandemic, and that share 
was expected to increase in the coming quarter. Many 
contractors were also experiencing project delays, 
particularly related to supply chain disruptions; a 
Montana contact said product delivery times were double 
or triple their normal length. Many firms continued to stay 
busy thanks to project backlogs built up prior to the 
pandemic. But firms across the District expressed 
concern about a shrinking pipeline of future work out for 
bid. Some locations appeared to be bucking the overall 
trend, including Fargo, N.D., and Rapid City, S.D., where 
August and September permitting activity was very 
healthy. Residential construction rose modestly. After a 
slow August, single-family permits rose sharply in 
September in Minneapolis-St. Paul. Permit activity over 
this period also rose in Bismarck, N.D., Rochester, 
Minn., and Sioux Falls, S.D. 
Commercial real estate continued to decline modestly 
since the last report. With many workers continuing to 
work from home, office space in downtown Minneapolis 
and St. Paul was seeing increased lease concessions, 
according to contacts. Lower foot traffic at office 
buildings also continued to put pressure on retail and 
other ancillary businesses, with significant closures of 
restaurant and other retail outlets. Multifamily vacancy 
rates were reportedly rising in some cities. Residential 
real estate continued to grow moderately overall. Closed 
home sales in August were widely higher, except in 
Minnesota, where sales were flat. Limited data for 
September home sales suggested continued growth, 
with Sioux Falls sales rising by 25 percent over last year, 
and Missoula, Mont., by 12 percent.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased moderately 
since the last report. An index of manufacturing activity 
indicated expansion in Minnesota and the Dakotas in 
September compared with a month earlier. About half of 
participants on a panel of South Dakota manufacturers 
reported that new orders had increased in August and 
September compared with the previous two months. A 
metal fabricator reported that recent demand from 
automation and packaging had increased, while demand 
from heavy construction and from oil and gas exploration 
was down. Manufacturing contacts continued to report 
pandemic-related bottlenecks in supply chains.   
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions improved going into the 
harvest season, however low prices depressed the 
outlook for farm incomes. Harvests were generally 
proceeding ahead of schedule in most areas of the 
District, and the majority of crop acres as of early-
October were in good or excellent condition. Despite 
recent drought conditions in some parts of the District, 
early estimates called for strong yields of corn and 
soybeans and record production in some states. District 
oil and gas exploration held steady at low levels. The 
number of drilling rigs in the District as of early October 
was unchanged from a month earlier, though recent oil 
production increased slightly. All but one District iron ore 
mine that shut down earlier in the year has reopened. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity expanded slightly in September despite a pullback in consumer spending for the first time 
since early summer. Retail, restaurant, auto and tourism sales declined since the previous survey, and expectations for 
consumer spending were mixed. Retail and auto contacts anticipated moderate gains, while restaurant and tourism con-
tacts anticipated declines heading into the winter months. Manufacturing production and new orders increased modestly 
at both non-durable and durable goods plants. Transportation and wholesale trade sales also rose modestly, but sales in 
the professional and high-tech sectors fell. Residential real estate activity continued to increase at a moderate pace, but 
commercial real estate conditions weakened. Energy activity stabilized somewhat, but revenues, employment and capital 
expenditures continued to decline in the sector. The agriculture sector improved slightly in September, although drought 
conditions intensified in parts of the District. Most industries continued to add jobs, but overall employment levels were 
modestly below year-ago levels. Wages and prices rose modestly, and similar gains were expected in the coming 
months.            
 
Employment and Wages  
District employment increased slightly since the last 
survey period but remained modestly below year-ago 
levels. Contacts in the wholesale trade, health services, 
and real estate sectors reported the largest employment 
gains, while tourism, transportation and manufacturing 
contacts reported slight increases. Restaurant contacts 
noted a slight decrease in employment following a mod-
est gain during the previous survey period. Employment 
levels remained below year-ago levels in most indus-
tries, but contacts in every sector except tourism ex-
pected to add jobs in the months ahead.   
A slight majority of contacts in the services sector report-
ed labor shortages, including openings for truck drivers, 
retail workers, and skilled technicians. Wages rose mod-
estly and were expected to continue to do so in the 
coming months. The majority of restaurant, wholesale, 
transportation and auto sales respondents expected 
wage growth over the coming year to be similar to that of 
last year. However, the majority of tourism and health 
services contacts expected slower wage growth than a 
year ago.                 
Prices  
Input and selling prices rose modestly in the services 
and manufacturing sectors in September and continued 
modest increases were expected in the next few months. 
Prices in the retail industry rose moderately and were 
well above year-ago levels. Transportation contacts 
noted a slight increase in input and selling prices, alt-
hough prices remained moderately below year-ago 
levels. Selling prices increased moderately for construc-
tion supplies, but were expected to remain flat in the 
upcoming months. Restaurant prices edged up during 
this survey period and remained moderately above year-
ago levels. Prices of raw materials and finished products 
rose modestly in the manufacturing sector and additional 
increases were anticipated in the coming months.                
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending fell modestly since the last survey 
period which was the first decline since early summer. 
Restaurant and auto sales experienced the largest de-
clines, both following moderate increases during the 
previous survey period. Tourism and retail sales fell 
slightly, after experiencing consistent gains throughout 
the summer. Tourism, restaurant, and auto sales were 
moderately below year-ago levels, however retail sales 
remained modestly above. In the next six months, many 
restaurant and auto contacts indicated that they will need 
to increase marketing or sales and the majority of re-
spondents in the retail and restaurant sectors noted that 
they will need to hire new employees. Retail and auto 
contacts expected moderate increases in sales over the 
next few months, while restaurant and tourism respond-
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
ents expected continued declines.           
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity expanded modestly in September, 
but remained moderately below year-ago levels. Both 
the non-durable and durable goods sectors experienced 
modest gains in production and new orders, marking a 
slight slowdown in the pace of growth for non-durable 
goods. Contacts anticipated further increases in produc-
tion and new orders in the coming months. Capital ex-
penditures were consistent with levels from a year ago in 
the non-durable sector, while down slightly from a year 
ago in the durable sector. The majority of manufacturing 
contacts expected to hire new employees in the next six 
months.   
Outside of manufacturing, sales in transportation and 
wholesale services increased modestly during the survey 
period, a weakened pace of growth for both sectors 
relative to this summer. Sales in professional and high-
tech services declined since the last survey and were 
modestly below year-ago levels. Contacts in transporta-
tion and professional and high-tech services expected 
modest increases in sales and slight declines in capital 
expenditure in the coming months, while wholesale 
respondents expected moderate increases in both 
measures.   
Real Estate and Construction  
Residential real estate activity grew moderately since the 
last survey, but commercial real estate conditions contin-
ued to decline. Home prices rose moderately as invento-
ries fell further. Home sales held steady, and remained 
moderately above a year ago. In addition, contacts ex-
pected moderate growth in both sales and prices in the 
upcoming months. Construction supply sales continued 
to rise modestly, keeping them moderately above year-
ago levels. Since the previous survey period, commercial 
real estate conditions continued to worsen with a modest 
increase in vacancy rates, a slight increase in develop-
er’s difficulty in accessing credit, and slight declines in 
absorption rates, sales, and rents. Commercial construc-
tion, however, increased slightly for the first time follow-
ing consistent declines since early spring. Overall, ex-
pectations improved in the commercial real estate sector 
compared to the previous survey, but contacts still ex-
pected conditions to worsen in the next few months.    
Banking 
Bankers reported modest growth in overall loan demand, 
with strong increases in residential real estate loan de-
mand and slight increases in consumer installment loan 
demand. Other lending categories continued to slow, 
with slight declines in commercial real estate loan de-
mand and modest declines in commercial, industrial, and 
agricultural loan demand. Since the last survey, credit 
standards tightened modestly for commercial real estate 
lending and tightened slightly for commercial, industrial, 
and consumer lending. Deposit levels increased moder-
ately over the past few weeks. Bankers reported moder-
ate declines in loan quality compared to a year ago and 
expected strong declines in quality over the next six 
months.                
Energy 
District energy activity stabilized somewhat since the 
previous survey period, but revenues, employment, and 
capital expenditures continued to decline. The number of 
active oil and gas rigs in the District was mostly un-
changed from August, and drilling and business activity 
remained significantly lower than a year ago. Prices for 
oil and gas remained below the average price District 
firms reported needing for drilling to be profitable. Ex-
pected oil prices for the near term were higher than price 
expectations from earlier in 2020, but longer-term projec-
tions were steady. Over a quarter of firms surveyed 
expected global oil demand to return to pre-COVID 
levels by Q2 2021, but the majority of contacts didn’t 
expect oil demand to rebound fully until 2022 or 2023. 
Moving forward, most firms expected more defaults and 
bankruptcies in the energy sector, and over half of firms 
anticipated a large increase in mergers and acquisitions 
through 2021.                 
Agriculture 
Economic conditions in the Tenth District agricultural 
sector improved slightly from the previous period despite 
intensifying drought conditions in some parts of the 
District. Alongside government payments that were 
expected to help offset revenue losses, prices for most 
of the region’s major agricultural commodities increased 
slightly in late September. However, apart from soybean 
and hog prices, agricultural prices generally remained 
low. Drought conditions intensified, particularly in west-
ern District states. Through September, the share of corn 
and soybean acres in poor condition was higher than a 
year ago and above the national average in all states 
except Missouri. Extreme drought in portions of Colora-
do, Wyoming, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Nebraska 
could further lower crop revenues and reduce income 
prospects for cow-calf producers impacted by the severe 
conditions.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic growth resumed in the Eleventh District after a spike in COVID-19 infections over the summer disrupted the 
budding recovery. Growth in the services and manufacturing sectors picked up pace in September, and retail sales 
increased. However, revenues remained well below normal levels in most industries. The housing market continued to 
perform well. In the banking sector, real estate lending picked up further but was offset by declines in consumer and 
commercial and industrial loan volumes, and most contacts expect an increase in nonperforming loans over the next six 
months. Energy activity remained depressed but started to show some signs of improvement. Employment in the district 
edged higher, with increasing reports of hiring. Input costs rose modestly while selling prices were flat to up slightly. 
Outlooks were largely positive but highly uncertain, particularly with regard to the presidential election and the unknown 
trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment edged higher, with increasing reports of 
hiring in certain sectors, including manufacturing. A 
Dallas Fed survey of well over 200 Texas service sector 
executives showed that 12 percent of services firms 
increased employment levels on net in September, 
which exceeded the share noting net layoffs for the first 
time since February. Hiring was particularly strong in 
financial and business services, while recent job growth 
in health care abated. Airlines continued facilitating 
voluntary separations and some have now begun fur-
loughing or laying off workers. Job losses continued in 
the energy sector, though at a more modest pace. Ener-
gy contacts noted that though the worst is likely past, 
more layoffs are coming, especially among exploration 
and production companies. 
Wage growth remained subdued in September. In the 
energy sector, wages remained frozen and some firms 
still have pay-cuts in place.  
Prices 
Input costs rose at a moderate pace, except in transpor-
tation and oilfield services where costs were down some-
what. Selling prices were flat to up slightly, with more 
pronounced increases in the retail and wholesale sec-
tors. 
Manufacturing  
Recovery in the manufacturing sector picked up steam in 
September, with production accelerating and outlooks 
continuing to improve. Month-over-month production 
increases were seen in both durables and nondurables 
manufacturing. Nonetheless, about 60 percent of manu-
facturers said business is still below normal levels, by 
about 30 percent on average. Petroleum refiners saw a 
decrease in production and utilization rates due in part to 
tropical storms curtailing operations. Margins among 
refiners and chemical manufacturers remained de-
pressed. Overall, sentiment among manufacturers re-
garding broader business conditions remained positive, 
though uncertainty persists, particularly surrounding the 
election.  
Retail Sales 
Retail sales surged in September, according to contacts. 
Even still, more than half said revenues were still below 
normal levels. Growth over the reporting period was led 
by nondurable goods and building materials sales. Auto 
sales remained weak, with multiple contacts citing supply 
chain delays. Among retailers overall, outlooks and 
expectations of future activity remained positive. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Growth in nonfinancial services activity picked up notably 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
in September after the recovery faltered in July and 
August in the wake of sharply rising COVID-19 cases. 
The recent pickup was led by professional and business 
services, which saw a marked acceleration in revenue 
growth over the reporting period. Leisure and hospitality 
also saw some recovery in revenues, but contacts noted 
that with uncertainty surrounding the spread of COVID-
19 there has been little change in visitor activity. While 
above-average growth was seen in nonfinancial services 
overall over the past six weeks, the sector has not yet 
recovered from the COVID-19 downturn. As of Septem-
ber, still more than 60 percent of contacts said revenues 
were below normal. Airlines noted that demand improved 
over the reporting period but was still down sharply year 
over year, and that corporate travel continued to be 
nearly nonexistent. 
Looking ahead, outlooks continued to improve, and half 
of contacts expect increased revenue six months from 
now, exceeding the less than twenty percent that expect 
a decrease. 
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market remained solid. Home 
sales continued to outperform expectations, though the 
pace was not as robust as in the previous reporting 
period. Builders said they are raising prices to cover 
higher construction costs and slow down sales as back-
logs remained high. Some contacts noted pouring slabs 
and holding off on framing houses due to crew shortages 
and high lumber prices. There were also widespread 
reports of supply chain issues, particularly for appliances 
and windows. New home development was active, and 
inventories continued to be exceptionally tight. Outlooks 
were generally optimistic, with some concern about the 
impact of the upcoming elections and a weak labor mar-
ket on future sales activity.   
Apartment demand rebounded in the third quarter, but 
rents were flat to down compared with year-ago levels 
and concessions were high, particularly in areas where 
there’s a lot of new apartment units. Office leasing activi-
ty weakened further, and available sublease space in-
creased notably in the third quarter. Retail market condi-
tions stayed fragile, while industrial demand continued to 
be strong.  
Financial Services 
Overall loan volume held fairly steady over the reporting 
period, with gains in real estate lending offset by de-
clines in consumer and commercial and industrial vol-
umes. In a Dallas Fed survey of 78 financial institutions, 
just over a quarter reported an increase in nonperform-
ing loans over the past six weeks while more than 60 
percent expect an increase in nonperforming loans six 
months from now. Contacts believe commercial real 
estate loans carry the greatest downside risk in terms of 
credit performance.  
In preparation for an increase in past due loans, the 
majority of contacts were monitoring loan performance 
more closely and setting aside additional reserves for 
loan losses. Also, about 70 percent of bankers expect 
lower profitability over the next six months. Cost cutting 
measures focus on lowering interest rates on deposits 
and reducing employment and/or worker compensation. 
Despite challenges, perceptions of general business 
activity improved notably, and loan demand outlooks 
turned positive. 
Energy 
The Eleventh District rig count remained near historical 
lows but increased over the reporting period for the first 
time since the beginning of the year. Most contacts are 
confident that oilfield activity has stabilized and begun a 
long slow slog toward recovery. Well completions rose 
as producers began bringing uncompleted wells into 
production. Contacts mentioned that the recovery of oil 
consumption is their primary near-term concern, alt-
hough uncertainty in both domestic and global affairs, 
particularly surrounding the U.S. election, are also wor-
ries.  Most executives don’t expect the U.S. oil rig count 
to increase substantially until the price of oil is at least 
$51 per barrel. 
Agriculture 
Soil moisture conditions deteriorated further across the 
western part of the district, where drought conditions 
continued to intensify. Row crop harvesting progressed 
and yields were quite strong, notably higher than last 
year for several crops. Grain prices generally improved 
over the past six weeks and will have reached profitable 
levels if production is at least average. Drought ham-
pered pasture conditions in parts of the district, which 
coupled with increased feed costs strained livestock 
producers. Contacts expressed concern over the La 
Niña weather pattern that has developed and is likely to 
persist through the winter, which will bring drier weather 
and could hinder crop and pasture conditions. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District expanded moderately on balance during the reporting period of mid-August 
through early October. Employment levels increased modestly on net, but hiring activity varied across sectors and 
somewhat across the District. Wages rose slightly, and price inflation increased marginally. Sales of retail goods rose 
noticeably, while conditions in the consumer and business services sectors improved somewhat. Manufacturing expand-
ed moderately. Conditions in the agriculture sector improved modestly. Residential real estate activity increased further, 
while the commercial market remained broadly unchanged. Lending picked up at a fair pace. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment levels increased modestly on net. Hiring 
picked up overall in the Mountain West as most busi-
nesses have reopened. Employment levels in California 
and the Pacific Northwest increased more slowly than in 
other parts of the District. Hiring in these regions for 
lower-paid service positions especially lagged, partially 
due to relatively more stringent social-distancing guide-
lines and partly due to smaller labor supply as people 
fled from wildfires. Employment levels in the information 
technology sector were generally stable over the report-
ing period, although one contact reported layoffs con-
nected to strategic discontinuation of some product lines. 
Hiring in lumberyards and construction firms was some-
what constrained by a shortage of skilled workers. Em-
ployers in the financial and energy sectors mostly en-
gaged in replacement hiring only. Employment levels in 
restaurants, hotels, retailers, and the entertainment and 
tourism sectors remained low. Hiring firms reported 
receiving plentiful applications for open positions and 
ease in filling them. Instances of absenteeism de-
creased, but workers showed continued concern about 
COVID-19 exposure and grappled with childcare needs. 
Wages increased slightly overall, although some employ-
ers reported keeping wages fairly unchanged over the 
reporting period. Labor shortages in the construction 
sector fueled increases in wages. Some employers in 
the financial sector observed higher wages over recent 
weeks despite still high unemployment in their communi-
ties and regions. Following other businesses in the 
Mountain West, a provider of animal health-care prod-
ucts planned to distribute merit increases. Wages in 
retail and agriculture in some areas in California in-
creased due to regulatory developments concerning 
overtime pay. Some firms reported that wage increases 
are not currently under consideration but noted that 
plans for next year may change, partially due to renegoti-
ations with unions. 
Prices  
Price inflation increased marginally on balance. In-
creased demand and low inventories for durable goods, 
building materials, and processed foods resulted in 
markedly higher prices for consumers. Constrained 
supply chains also put upward pressure on costs faced 
by restaurants and some retailers, though some firms 
were able to absorb these costs. In contrast, prices 
decreased for many agricultural goods, including animal 
proteins. Many bankers reported charging lower interest 
rates on loans. Similarly, scheduled price increases for 
undergraduate tuition and some technology services 
were deferred this year. A few contacts also noted that 
prices for air travel and hotel rooms remained subdued.    
Retail Trade and Services 
Retail sales rose noticeably over the reporting period. 
The retail sector benefited from further easing of social- 
distancing restrictions and better adherence to health 
and safety guidelines. Contacts reported that consumers 
felt more comfortable shopping, and foot traffic in-
creased. Sales in brick-and-mortar stores picked up 
strongly but remained below pre-pandemic levels, while 
online sales continued to be robust. Demand for durable 
goods such as home appliances, home improvement 
goods, and vehicles increased noticeably, and retailers 
noted low inventories. Grocers in Southern California 
and the Pacific Northwest highlighted limited supplies of 
many products and more customers stocking up and 
switching brands. A specialty retailer in Arizona noted 
strong sales for pet products but weak department store 
sales for women’s fashion products. 
The Beige Book ■ October 2020 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
Conditions in the consumer and business services sec-
tors improved somewhat over the reporting period. High 
demand remained for logistics and transportation ser-
vices, including home deliveries and shipment of health-
care products. Activity remained strong in the information 
technology and health-care sectors as well as the mental 
health services subsector. Food service, travel, and hos-
pitality providers reported incremental sales increases 
over recent weeks, though the pickup in activity has been 
comparatively faster in the Mountain West relative to 
other areas in the District. Generally, firms in these sec-
tors continued to operate at a fraction of their pre-
pandemic levels, and contacts expressed concern re-
garding prospects for the winter. Conditions in the enter-
tainment and the health and beauty sectors continued to 
be precarious. One contact in the education sector report-
ed decreased enrollment rates at both two- and four-year 
undergraduate institutions, which is unusual during eco-
nomic downturns.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing expanded moderately. Demand for manu-
factured wood products and building materials soared on 
the back of a very active residential real estate market. 
Construction activity also underpinned strong sales of 
fabricated and recycled metals over the reporting period, 
although one contact attributed the rise in demand mainly 
to niche markets. Manufacturers of home appliances and 
recreational equipment reported limited increases in 
production, given pandemic-related capacity reductions. 
In the Mountain West, meat-processing plants saw in-
creased demand for beef products but a reduction in pork 
sales. These plants continued to experience COVID-19-
related staff shortages but remained open per local offi-
cials’ orders aimed at ensuring adequate food supply.  
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector improved modestly. 
Most of the grain crops in the Mountain West and the 
eastern Pacific Northwest have been harvested, with high 
yield and quality. Yields of grapes, nuts, peaches, and 
tomatoes in California’s Central Valley also were good. 
Potato output was not as high as expected, though quali-
ty remained high. Domestic sales of peaches, wine 
grapes, vegetables, oils, seafood, and beef rose on the 
tailwind of ameliorated supply chain disruptions and 
reduced costs. Higher output and a recent depreciation in 
the U.S. dollar contributed to increased international 
sales of grain, fruit, raisins, and nuts, principally to Asian 
markets. Growers throughout the District reported the 
potential risks of new COVID-19 cases among their 
workforce as well as wildfires, which could harm supply 
chains and production.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential construction activity increased further, sup-
ported by a low interest rate environment. Contacts 
reported increased demand for new and existing homes 
throughout the District, which kept inventories low and 
construction permitting high. Home prices continued to 
climb at double-digit rates, partially fed by increased 
demand for suburban homes in the current telework 
environment. Rents in metropolitan areas dipped. Con-
tacts expressed some concern over the undersupply of 
affordable housing, especially after some regions suf-
fered from wildfire-led destruction. Homebuilders in the 
Mountain West and Pacific Northwest reported back-
logged projects, increased costs of building materials, 
and finalized sales well in advance of project completion.  
Activity in the commercial real estate market remained 
broadly unchanged. Demand for commercial and office 
space was either stagnant or decreased in most of the 
District. However, new hotels and offices continued to be 
built in the Mountain West. In other areas, demand for 
new industrial and warehouse space expanded. A con-
tact in Alaska noted that prices for commercial real es-
tate remained unchanged despite subdued local activity 
and more emigration from the area.  
Financial Institutions  
Overall lending activity picked up at a fair pace. Contacts 
noted that the bulk of demand was for home mortgages 
and refinancing as households took advantage of low 
interest rates, as well as for auto loans. In contrast, 
utilization of commercial lines of credit was down, as was 
demand for unsecured personal loans. Financiers noted 
strong asset quality, liquidity conditions, and capital 
positions. Deposits continued to grow at double-digit 
rates. Some contacts suspected that deposit levels 
remained high partially due to PPP funds being kept in 
firms’ checking accounts. Contacts highlighted some 
uncertainty regarding loan demand in coming months 
given expected decreases in activity over the winter. 
Some bankers in California reported that a few retail 
bank branches closed due in part to wildfires. One con-
tact expressed concern over mortgage forbearances and 
eviction moratoriums and their implications for loan 
servicing and the health of the real estate market once 
the deferral periods are over. ■ 


