The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EDT 
Wednesday 
July 18, 2018 
July 2018 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

National Summary 
    1 
Boston 
A-1
First District 
New York 
B-1
Second District 
Philadelphia  
C-1
Third District  
Cleveland 
D-1
Fourth District 
Richmond 
E-1
Fifth District 
Atlanta 
F-1
Sixth District 
Chicago 
G-1
Seventh District 
St. Louis 
H-1
Eighth District 
Minneapolis 
I-1
Ninth District  
Kansas City 
J-1
Tenth District 
Dallas 
K-1
Eleventh District 
San Francisco 
L-1
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston based 
on information collected on or before July 9, 2018. This document 
summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal 
Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of Federal 
Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to expand across the United States, with 10 of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts reporting 
moderate or modest growth. The outliers were the Dallas District, which reported strong growth driven in part by the 
energy sector, and the St. Louis District where growth was described as slight. Manufacturers in all Districts expressed 
concern about tariffs and in many Districts reported higher prices and supply disruptions that they attributed to the new 
trade policies. All Districts reported that labor markets were tight and many said that the inability to find workers con-
strained growth. Consumer spending was up in all Districts with particular strength in Dallas and Richmond. Contacts 
reported higher input prices and shrinking margins. Six Districts specifically mentioned trucking capacity as an issue 
and attributed it to a shortage of commercial drivers. Contacts in several Districts reported slow growth in existing home 
sales but were not overly concerned about rising interest rates. Commercial real estate was largely unchanged.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment continued to rise at a modest to moderate pace in most Districts. Labor markets were described as tight, 
with most Districts reporting firms had difficulty finding qualified labor. Shortages were cited across a wide range of 
occupations, including highly skilled engineers, specialized construction and manufacturing workers, IT professionals, 
and truck drivers; some Districts indicated labor shortages were constraining growth. Districts noted firms were adding 
work hours, strengthening retention efforts, partnering with local schools, and converting temporary workers to perma-
nent, as well as raising compensation to attract and retain employees. On balance, wage increases were modest to 
moderate, with some differences across sectors; a couple of Districts cited a pickup in the pace of wage growth.  
Prices 
Prices increased in all Districts at a pace that was modest to moderate on average; reports showed upticks in inflation 
in several Districts. The prices of key inputs rose further, including fuel, construction materials, freight, and metals; a 
few Districts described these input price pressures as elevated or strong. Tariffs contributed to the increases for metals 
and lumber. However, the extent of pass-through from input to consumer prices remained slight to moderate. Move-
ments in agricultural commodities prices were mixed across products and Districts. Pricing pressures are expected to 
intensify further moving forward in some Districts, while in others the outlook is for stable price increases at a modest to 
moderate pace. 
Boston 
Business activity continued to expand at a moderate 
pace, with contacted manufacturers, retailers, hotels, 
and software and IT firms reporting year-over-year in-
creases in revenues. Some contacts saw higher prices 
and lower margins. Contacts reported difficulty hiring in 
skilled occupations.  
 
New York 
The regional economy continued to expand at a moder-
ate pace, and labor markets have remained tight. Input 
price increases have remained fairly widespread, and 
selling prices continued to increase moderately.  Hous-
ing markets have continued to firm, on balance, while 
commercial real estate markets have softened a bit. 
 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
Economic activity continued to expand at a modest pace. 
With tightening labor markets, job growth also remained 
modest, but wages are now rising moderately. On bal-
ance, contacts continued to observe modest price in-
creases with few concerns for future inflation. Notably, 
nonresidential construction activity has begun to decline 
from its prior high levels.  
Cleveland 
The District economy grew moderately. Labor markets 
tightened, with wage pressures noted broadly. Rising 
fuel and metals costs are pressuring manufacturers, 
construction firms, and transportation companies. 
Stronger confidence in the economy boosted demand in 
nonfinancial services and the retail sector. Construction 
activity remained strong. 
Richmond 
The regional economy grew at a moderate rate. Manu-
facturing and retail sales strengthened, but firms in both 
sectors faced transportation constraints and rising input 
costs. Trucking firms saw record demand, which was 
partially unmet due to the driver shortage. Port activity 
remained strong. Labor demand increased moderately, 
and some firms reported shortages. Price growth accel-
erated slightly but remained moderate, overall.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity modestly expanded since the previous 
report. The labor market remained tight. Reports of wage 
growth were mixed. Some commodity input prices con-
tinued to increase. Consumer spending improved since 
the last report. Nonresidential construction increased; 
however, multifamily construction showed signs of slow-
ing. Manufacturing activity grew.  
Chicago 
Growth in economic activity slowed to a modest pace. 
Manufacturing production increased moderately, while 
employment, consumer spending, business spending, 
and construction and real estate activity grew modestly. 
Wages and prices increased modestly, and financial 
conditions improved modestly. The outlook for agricul-
ture income dimmed some. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic conditions improved slightly. Labor market 
conditions remained tight and wage growth was modest. 
Local contacts reported robust increases in shipping 
costs across all sectors due to higher fuel prices and 
driver shortages. Businesses’ reports on the impact of 
tariffs have varied by industry.  
Minneapolis 
Economic activity in the Ninth District grew moderately, 
led by strong growth in manufacturing. Hiring demand 
remained strong, but workers were harder to find. Wages 
grew moderately with some signs of stronger growth 
among union wages. Professional services firms saw 
growth across the board, and lodging demand appeared 
robust heading into the summer tourism season. 
Kansas City 
Economic activity expanded moderately since the previ-
ous survey, and growth was expected to continue in the 
months ahead. Most sectors expanded, including a slight 
pickup in energy activity, modestly higher consumer 
spending and business services, moderately stronger 
real estate activity, and continued robust gains in the 
manufacturing sector. Capital spending plans across the 
District were positive.  
Dallas 
Economic activity continued to grow at a solid pace. 
Manufacturing output rose, and broad-based expansion 
in the services and energy sectors continued. Retail 
spending rose while drought conditions became more 
widespread. Hiring remained solid despite a tight labor 
market, and wage and price pressures stayed elevated. 
Expectations regarding future business activity were 
optimistic, although uncertainty arising from U.S. trade 
policy weighed on outlooks. 
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Conditions in the labor 
market remained tight, and price inflation increased 
moderately. Sales of retail goods picked up slightly, and 
activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
edged down. Activity in the manufacturing sector and in 
residential and commercial real estate markets was 
solid. Lending activity ticked up moderately.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
First District economic activity continued to expand at a moderate pace, with nearly all responding retailers, manufactur-
ers, hospitality providers, and software and IT firms citing year-over-year increases in sales and revenues in recent 
weeks. Residential real estate markets saw price increases but fewer closed sales although contacts reported higher 
listings and expected higher sales in the future. Commercial real estate markets were generally expanding, although 
growth in retail was mixed. Hotels reported slower growth which they attributed to the expansion of on-line short term 
rentals. Contacts across a range of industries said trucking capacity continued to be a major issue. Overall, the outlook 
continued to be positive. Contacts expressed concerns about tariffs but none cited trade issues as affecting demand or 
hiring and capital expenditure plans. 
Employment and Wages  
Many responding firms have done some hiring; most 
reported tight labor markets and modest increases in 
pay. Retail contacts reported that labor supply was tight 
and one contact said labor costs were up 10 percent 
over the previous year. All surveyed manufacturers were 
hiring or maintaining current levels of employment. Man-
ufacturing contacts said the labor market was tight, but 
the exceptional difficulties were mostly in highly skilled 
areas like engineering. Labor shortages continued to be 
an issue in the hospitality industry, particularly in season-
al destinations like Cape Cod. Contacts in the software 
and information technology areas expressed concerns 
about restrictive immigration policies.   
Prices  
Most respondents reported modest increases in prices. 
Although contacts were concerned about the effect of 
tariffs, none of our contacts reported any material impact 
so far. Higher freight costs continued to be an issue 
across a wide array of industries, with the shortage of 
commercial truck drivers being cited as an important 
factor. Several manufacturing contacts said that they 
were only able to pass through a portion of the higher 
costs to customers. As a result, margins were declining. 
House prices continued to rise throughout the region.  
Retail and Tourism 
The retailers consulted for this round reported recent 
comparable-store sales gains ranging from 3 percent to 
10 percent year-over-year. One firm noted that higher 
freight costs contributed to higher overhead costs and 
that a shortage of workers led to a 10 percent increase in 
labor costs compared to a year ago. Despite these high-
er operating costs, the retail outlook for the rest of the 
year remains positive, provided that consumer sentiment 
does not abate.  
Two travel industry sources reported that business was 
either flat or slightly down in late May, but appeared to 
have rebounded strongly in June. Both contacts reported 
that traditional lodging providers, such as hotels and bed
-and-breakfast establishments, were encountering in-
creased competition from online platforms offering short-
term rentals. This shift in consumer preferences was 
expected to continue. Labor shortages continued to be a 
concern, and in places like the Outer Cape, the average 
hourly wage for some low-skilled hospitality workers was 
reportedly about $20 per hour. Through May, domestic 
travel to Boston is up 8.1 percent year-over-year, while 
international travel is up 7.1 percent year-over-year. The 
outlook is positive, but there was some concern that 
escalating trade tensions could put a damper on interna-
tional tourism to the United States.   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
Of nine firms we contacted this cycle, all but one report-
ed higher sales. The one exception was a toy manufac-
turer and our contact said that the weakness was ex-
pected and attributable to the closure of a major toy 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
retailer. While several contacts expressed concern about 
the effect of the trade war on sales, none reported any 
sales declines as a result. Four of our contacts said that 
costs were rising faster than sales revenue. Rising costs 
were attributed to raw material prices and a lack of truck-
ing capacity. One contact in the container industry said 
that they had planned to increase output and hire addi-
tional workers but had not because of delays in the 
delivery of new capital equipment.  
Software and Information Technology Services  
Software and IT contacts in the First District continued to 
see activity expanding steadily. Revenue was up 3 per-
cent to 10 percent year-over-year in the first half of the 
year. Several noted increases in margins, despite some 
seasonal sluggishness in demand. Contacts attributed 
growth in margins to internal productivity improvements. 
Firms across the sector expressed concern about acquir-
ing and retaining talent in the tech industry. Further, 
contacts unanimously expressed anxiety about shocks to 
the broader economy, such as the potential for changes 
in trade, tariffs, immigration, war, and the stock market. 
Firms do not expect changes in headcounts or wages in 
the short-run, but some noted upcoming and potential 
capital investments. Overall, contacts felt positive about 
their progress thus far and optimistic about the rest of 
the year.   
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate market conditions were de-
scribed as stable or improving in recent weeks. Although 
mixed across locations and property types, activity levels 
on balance were moderate to robust. Boston area con-
tacts described the city’s office market as strong by 
historical standards, with low and falling vacancy rates, 
robust rents that increased slightly, and record-high 
sales prices for select buildings. Industrial leasing activity 
in the Boston area was seen as stable, although one 
contact reported that sales demand for warehouse space 
near Boston surged on the expectation of rising tenant 
demand. In Providence office leasing activity was steady 
at a moderate pace amid falling vacancy rates and rising 
rents, but industrial leasing activity was hampered by 
that market’s 1 percent vacancy rate. Construction activi-
ty across multiple property types maintained a strong 
pace in Boston and Providence, and increased further in 
the Portland area, but remained scant in the Hartford 
area. Contacts expect stable or improving commercial 
real estate activity moving forward, although most cited 
downside risks, such as rising interest rates, trade wars, 
and local labor shortages.  
 
Residential Real Estate 
Entering the summer, the residential real estate market 
in the First District continued to display a sellers’ market 
environment, highlighting high demand and increasing 
prices. Closed sales were down in all reporting areas but 
pending sales increased. Contacts cited insufficient 
inventory as the reason for the drop in sales but re-
mained optimistic about the outlook on the heels of 
strong buyer demand and increasing new listings. A 
representative from Rhode Island noted that 
“Competition is fierce and buyers are finding themselves 
in a race to the finish line. Inventory is so tight that prop-
erties are being sold as soon as they go on the market, 
often in multiple bid situations.” Median sales price in-
creased in all areas but Vermont. Contacts expressed 
concerns about the rapid price appreciation as many 
potential buyers were priced out of the market. Contacts 
said that borrowers, despite high prices and changes to 
the tax code, were still willing and able to finance pur-
chases.■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has continued to expand at a moderate pace since the last report. The labor 
market has remained tight, while wage growth has mostly stayed steady. Input price increases have remained fairly 
widespread, and consumer price inflation continued to run a bit higher than earlier this year. Activity in the manufactur-
ing and distribution industries grew at a fairly brisk pace, while growth in most service industries has been more sub-
dued. Consumer spending has been steady to up slightly in recent weeks, with tourism remaining fairly robust. Housing 
markets have been somewhat stronger, on balance, while commercial real estate markets have generally softened. 
Finally, banks reported continued growth in loan demand and little change in delinquency rates.     
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight across the District. 
Businesses reported particular trouble filling senior posi-
tions and finding technically skilled workers, especially in 
IT. One business contact observed that almost all job-
seekers are already employed. A New York City employ-
ment agency noted that clients have had difficulty adjust-
ing to a city law prohibiting prospective employers from 
asking about salary history or using it as a guide to 
compensating new hires.   
Hiring activity has been steady overall but mixed by 
industry. Business contacts in manufacturing, wholesale, 
retail, and finance reported a pickup in hiring activity, 
while those engaged in information and professional & 
business services noted some pullback in hiring. Con-
tacts in the transportation industry noted further shrink-
age in their workforce. Separately, a payroll service firm 
observed that job growth at small businesses has slowed 
somewhat recently. A major utility firm remarked that 
devoting more resources to vocational training and build-
ing relationships with local high schools and colleges, 
has made it easier for them to fill job openings.   
Wage growth has generally remained steady overall but 
somewhat more brisk than last year. Wages were report-
ed to be flat in the education & health and transportation 
sectors but rising in other sectors. The most widespread 
gains were reported in retail & wholesale trade and 
leisure & hospitality.          
Prices  
Businesses reported ongoing widespread hikes in input 
prices. The most widespread increases were in retail & 
wholesale trade, education & health, and real estate. 
Manufacturers and leisure & hospitality firms noted some 
diminution in input price pressures since the prior report. 
Contacts in almost all sectors anticipated further increas-
es in the months ahead.  
As for selling prices, wholesalers continued to report 
widespread price hikes, and businesses in leisure & 
hospitality and real estate noted some acceleration. 
Prices for Broadway theater tickets rose fairly sharply in 
June and were up nearly 15 percent from a year earlier. 
Retail contacts noted somewhat less discounting than a 
year ago, resulting in a modest hike in effective selling 
prices. Similarly, auto dealers reported some increase in 
average used car prices and fewer incentive offers on 
new vehicles. Businesses in other industries reported 
that prices were mostly stable. Looking ahead, a sizable 
share of firms in leisure & hospitality, wholesale trade, 
and real estate said they anticipate price hikes.      
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were steady to up slightly in May and June 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
running roughly on plan. A major retail chain noted that 
sales were on plan and up modestly from a year earlier, 
with New York City stores continuing to post relatively 
strong results, in good part driven by tourism.  
New vehicle sales in upstate New York were soft in May 
and June, continuing to run short of year-earlier levels. 
Sales of used cars have been more robust and contin-
ued to rise modestly. Vehicle inventories remained at or 
above desired levels. Dealers indicated that retail and 
wholesale credit conditions remained in good shape. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA) edged up to a cyclical high in June, led by an 
historically positive assessment of the job market.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
Both manufacturers and wholesale distributors indicated 
that activity continued to expand at a brisk pace since 
the last report. Transportation firms reported more sub-
dued growth. Regarding the near-term business outlook, 
contacts in the wholesale and transportation sectors 
continued to express widespread optimism. Manufactur-
ers remained optimistic, on balance, but have become 
less so than earlier in the year. A number of manufactur-
ing contacts remarked that tariffs have raised their costs. 
Moreover, uncertainty about future trade policy was cited 
as a major concern, particularly in parts of upstate New 
York, where there is substantial trade with Canada.       
Services 
Service-sector firms continued to report minimal to mod-
est growth in activity. Contacts in professional & busi-
ness services, education & health, and leisure & hospi-
tality indicated modest growth, while those in the infor-
mation industry continued to report flat activity. Looking 
ahead, leisure & hospitality businesses remained glum 
about near-term prospects, but contacts in the other 
service industries expressed fairly broad optimism.  
Tourism has been fairly robust in recent weeks. New 
York City hotels reported a moderate pickup in both 
occupancy rates and revenues. Similarly, Broadway 
theaters reported a modest pickup in attendance and a 
marked pickup in revenues, which were up roughly 16 
percent from a year earlier in May and June.           
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been mixed 
but, on balance, somewhat stronger since the last report. 
Across much of the District, a limited supply of homes on 
the market has restrained sales activity and boosted 
prices. The market in the Buffalo metro area has been 
particularly robust, with strong demand and lean invento-
ries driving up prices and producing many bidding wars. 
One exception to this trend has been the Manhattan co-
op and condo market, where inventories have risen, 
sales activity has receded, and prices have been flat to 
modestly lower—partly attributed to some drop-off in 
investor purchases and foreign buyers. In and around 
New York City, the high end of the sales market contin-
ues to lag. One industry contact surmised that more 
limited deductibility of homeowner costs under the new 
tax law has been a factor in restraining demand.  
The apartment rental market has been mixed. Effective 
rents are flat to down modestly across New York City, 
though demand for larger rental apartments has picked 
up recently—reportedly reflecting both rent reductions 
and a shift away from homeownership. In northern New 
Jersey, upstate New York, and the suburbs around New 
York City, however, demand has been robust and rents 
have continued to trend up moderately. 
Commercial real estate markets have been steady to 
softer. Office availability rates were steady to up slightly, 
and asking rents continued to drift down across down-
state New York, though they have risen modestly across 
northern New Jersey and upstate New York. The market 
for retail space continued to slacken, except in upstate 
New York, where vacancy rates were steady and rents 
were up moderately from a year ago. The industrial 
market continued to strengthen in northern New Jersey 
but has stabilized elsewhere across the District.  
New multi-family construction starts have been steady to 
somewhat weaker. Office construction has picked up 
slightly across upstate New York but has remained mori-
bund across the rest of the District. New industrial devel-
opment has slowed as well. While new construction—
both residential and commercial—has been sluggish, 
ongoing construction activity has remained strong.        
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
increased demand for consumer loans, residential mort-
gages, and commercial mortgages, but no change in 
demand for C&I loans and refinancing activity. Bankers 
reported tightening credit standards for commercial loans 
and mortgages. Banks noted an increase in the average 
deposit rate and narrowing loan spreads across all cate-
gories. Finally, banks reported lower delinquency rates 
for C&I loans but no change in delinquencies across all 
other loan categories.  ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Aggregate business activity in the Third District continued at a modest pace of growth during the current Beige Book 
period. Employment also continued at a modest pace; but with hiring constrained by a tightening labor market, wage 
increases have become more widespread and accelerated to a moderate pace. Despite rising labor costs, most con-
tacts are not yet concerned that inflation will exceed its current modest pace. While manufacturing activity and nonfinan-
cial services maintained a moderate pace of growth, most retail sectors continued at a modest pace, at best. Mean-
while, the construction and real estate sectors tended to be flat or declining. In particular, nonresidential construction 
activity has begun to decline from its previously high levels and represented the only sector with a significant shift in 
activity this period. The growth outlook over the next six months remained positive, with over half of all firms anticipating 
increases in general activity. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment continued to grow at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. Manufacturing and non-
manufacturing firms reported ongoing net additions to 
staff; moreover, hiring has broadened among nonmanu-
facturers since last period. Average hours worked rose 
over the period for manufacturing firms and nonmanufac-
turers.  
Staffing firms reported ongoing demand for workers, but 
a scarcity of candidates, plus difficulty hiring and retain-
ing employees. As the job market tightens, wages have 
risen, and employers have converted more full-time 
temporary workers to permanent employees than is 
normal. However, according to one contact, many temp 
orders continued to be for part-time work.  
On balance, wage growth appears to have accelerated 
to a moderate pace and was more widespread. Over half 
of the nonmanufacturing contacts reported increases in 
wage and benefit costs. Several banking contacts also 
noted rising wages, especially for lower-wage jobs.  
Prices  
According to most contacts, price increases remained 
modest. Among nonmanufacturing firms, a little over one
-third reported increases for prices paid, and about one-
third reported increases for prices received – somewhat 
higher than in the prior period. Reports of price increases 
remained widespread among manufacturing firms this 
period, with half noting higher prices paid and one-third 
indicating higher prices received for their own goods. 
Banking contacts expressed little concern over the path 
of inflation.  
One service firm noted that it had been slowly raising 
wages and was now starting to push prices up to meet 
the added expense. However, one homebuilder reported 
no ability to raise prices despite facing rising costs for 
many building materials.  
Looking ahead six months, manufacturing firms contin-
ued to anticipate higher prices, with two-thirds expecting 
increases in prices paid and over half expecting increas-
es in prices received for their own goods.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity maintained a moderate pace of 
growth. About 40 percent of the firms reported an in-
crease in shipments and new orders; however, this 
percentage was closer to 50 percent for new orders 
during the prior period.  
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
The makers of chemical products, paper products, fabri-
cated metal products, and electronic equipment tended 
to note gains in new orders and shipments; the makers 
of lumber products, primary metals, and industrial ma-
chinery reported mixed results. One machinery manufac-
turer noted that the effects of the steel tariffs have been 
chaotic to its supply chain – disrupting planned orders, 
increasing prices, and prompting some panic buying.  
On balance, manufacturing contacts continued to expect 
general activity to increase over the next six months; the 
percentage of firms expecting future increases remained 
just below 50 percent. About 40 percent of the firms 
expected increases in future employment and future 
capital expenditures, which represented an improved 
outlook for capital expenditures since the prior period, 
but a lower expectation for employment.  
Consumer Spending 
Contacts for nonauto retail sales continued to report 
modest sales growth in May and June – aided by favora-
ble weather and steady gas prices. Retailers were gen-
erally more optimistic than in recent periods due in part 
to the corporate tax rate reduction; operators of brick-
and-mortar stores were further cheered by the recent 
Supreme Court decision to allow states to tax online 
sales.  
Auto dealers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania reported 
year-over-year sales that were flat to up slightly in May 
and June. Year-to-date sales appear to be holding even 
with 2017’s high levels. However, dealers noted greater 
downside risk than normal for the second half of this 
year, including disruptions from tariffs, volatile markets, 
and rising interest rates.  
Tourism contacts continued to report modest growth 
overall. As temperatures climbed past 100 degrees in 
Philadelphia, expectations rose that more city residents 
would escape to the shore and the mountains in July and 
August. Atlantic City’s casino revenues fell on a year-
over-year basis in May, yet two large casinos reopened 
in late June.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms continued to report 
moderate growth in general activity. Nearly half of the 
firms contacted reported increases in sales and new 
orders. One large firm reported that growth has been 
better than it was in 2017 – which had been stagnant – 
and the firm continues to see no problems with payment 
collections from its clients. Expectations of future growth 
became more widespread, with over two-thirds of the 
firms anticipating increased activity. 
Financial Services 
Financial firms reported modest growth in overall loan 
volumes (excluding credit cards) – a somewhat faster 
pace than last period. Volumes grew moderately in mort-
gages and in commercial and industrial lending and grew 
slightly in commercial real estate lending. However, 
these gains were offset by slight declines in home equity 
lines, auto loans, and in other consumer loans (not else-
where classified). Compared with one year earlier, loans 
grew modestly, and in all categories except for home 
equity lines.  
During the current period, credit card lending grew at a 
moderate pace – slow by comparison to the same period 
last year for this highly seasonal measure. Over the 
year, credit card lending has grown modestly.  
Banking contacts continued to note competitive pressure 
to raise deposit rates but flagged few concerns about 
credit standards and no issues with credit quality. Bank-
ers remained generally confident about future economic 
prospects.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Homebuilders reported no change in sales and construc-
tion activity. In most major Third District markets, sales of 
existing homes continued to be down moderately com-
pared with the same period last year. According to bro-
kers, inventories remain at very low levels throughout the 
District.  
Overall, nonresidential real estate contacts reported no 
change in the modest growth in leasing activity. Howev-
er, as several major projects reach or near completion in 
Philadelphia, there has been a slow and steady decline 
in labor hours from previously high levels of construction 
activity. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Business activity in the Fourth District grew moderately during the survey period. Demand was strong in many sectors, 
but hiring continued at about the same pace as in the previous survey period as a dearth of qualified workers con-
strained hiring. Wages rose moderately, and increases were in line with recent trends. Upward pressure on input costs 
was strong, notably for fuel and metals. Contacts widely attributed the cost increases to import tariffs. However, final 
selling prices rose only moderately. Firms raised their prices to cover, at least partially, their increased raw materials 
and transportation costs. Otherwise, businesses were cautious about raising their selling prices. Consumer demand, 
including for autos, was stable to slightly higher. Manufacturing capacity utilization rose to meet strong demand, but a 
number of producers remarked that they were struggling to keep up with orders. Freight volumes trended higher. Con-
struction activity remained strong. 
Employment and Wages  
District businesses added workers at a pace that was 
moderate and similar to that of the previous survey 
period. Most firms reported strong customer demand and 
optimism about the economy’s near-term prospects as 
supporting their hiring decisions. Very few firms reduced 
headcount, and a sizable share reported creating new 
positions. Hiring was strongest among construction firms 
thanks to high project volumes. Also, strong demand for 
technology services enabled professional services to 
add workers at a healthy clip. Contacts reported the 
dearth of qualified workers constrained hiring across an 
array of occupations. The problem was most often high-
lighted by manufacturing, construction, and transporta-
tion companies. One steel contact noted the company 
had significantly increased overtime hours to cope with 
the worker challenge. A nonresidential builder noticed 
that worker turnover was somewhat higher than normal. 
Despite tightness in the overall job market, wage pres-
sures remained consistent with recent trends in the 
District. In general, employers raised wages moderately 
as part of cost-of-living increases or annual merit raises 
or to fulfill union contracts.   
Prices  
Upward pressure on input costs remained strong, espe-
cially for fuel and metals. Manufacturers and builders 
commented widely that import tariffs were lifting steel 
and aluminum prices. In some cases, manufacturers 
noted a rush to purchase metals in anticipation of addi-
tional price increases. To a lesser extent, construction 
contacts also noted lumber price increases. Aside from 
the manufacturing, construction, and transportation 
sectors, contacts noted moderate cost increases that 
were consistent with recent trends. Retailers pointed out 
that prices for cotton and raw food ingredients rose for 
their suppliers. Final selling prices rose moderately, with 
little change compared with those of the previous survey 
period. Overall, firms managed to raise their prices to 
compensate, at least partially, for rising raw materials 
and transportation costs. Aside from that, firms either 
held their prices or cautiously nudged them higher.  
Consumer Spending 
Retail demand improved moderately, extending a streak 
that started in the final months of 2017. In addition to a 
seasonal boost, food retailers and clothing retailers 
noted that continued strong consumer confidence lifted 
sales. A few contacts noted slight improvement in sales 
of discretionary items and higher quality products. Retail 
sales in the Fourth District were reported to be mostly in 
line with activity in the rest of the country. Inventories 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

D-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland  
and profits were stable. 
Auto demand and vehicle financing conditions held 
steady. One auto dealer noted that leasing activity had 
weakened as manufacturers reduced their support. All 
contacts reported that sales of passenger vehicles 
lagged those of crossovers, SUVs, and trucks. One 
contact speculated that the market share for such vehi-
cles would increase because of increased vehicle fuel 
economy, older customers’ need for comfort, and a 
younger generation of customers starting families. Ex-
pectations for vehicle sales in the near-term were mixed. 
One dealer was concerned that price increases and 
higher interest rates could sap demand. Another dealer 
was optimistic that activity in the energy industry could lift 
sales in the region.  
Manufacturing 
The strong manufacturing demand seen earlier in the 
year showed no signs of letting up in the current survey 
period. Contacts mostly attributed the momentum to 
strong US economic growth that broadly supported 
demand in end markets. One pump and motor manufac-
turer noted increased demand from customers in primary 
metals manufacturing and extractive industries. An in-
dustrial metals producer cited strong demand from the 
construction sector. Some manufacturers noted that 
capacity utilization had risen to meet demand and that a 
few contacts mentioned they struggled to keep up with 
orders. Contacts remarked that concerns about future 
trade- and inflation-related price increases had prompted 
some customers to accelerate purchases. Most manu-
facturers expected that continued economic growth 
would lead to stronger customer demand in the near 
term. However, one auto-related manufacturer expected 
import tariffs to lead to weaker sales because of the 
consequent increase in prices. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Demand for new homes grew modestly in the current 
survey period. Homebuilders noted that rising interest 
rates and concern about rising materials prices motivat-
ed some customers to move their purchases forward. 
Contacts widely expected stable demand in the coming 
quarter. Real estate agents noted demand for Section 8 
vouchers was stable. However, reports of first-time buy-
ers’ home demand were mixed. Sales of houses priced 
below $400,000 and those priced between $600,000 and 
$800,000 strengthened, according to some contacts. 
Financing conditions for homebuyers were mostly stable. 
Nonresidential builders noted that the strong demand of 
recent periods continued in the current period and that 
backlogs ticked higher as firms struggled with labor 
constraints. Capital investment plans were mostly un-
changed, although one commercial builder stated that 
the firm boosted spending to use drones for surveying to 
make up for the shortage of workers. Most contacts 
expected the current momentum in customer demand to 
continue in the near term. However, there was some 
concern that demand from industrial clients could weak-
en depending on the course taken by trade disputes.  
Financial Services 
Most banking contacts reported that steady economic 
growth had kept loan demand stable. Deposits fell during 
the last two months because of seasonal changes fol-
lowing the tax-filing season. Some bankers noted that 
strong revenue growth combined with higher borrowing 
costs drove some customers to fund capital expenditures 
and expansions with cash rather than with credit. Most 
contacts reported that delinquency rates remained 
steady, although rising interest rates were cited as a risk 
to the outlook.   
Nonfinancial Services 
Nonfinancial services firms reported strong demand 
thanks to generally favorable economic conditions. Busi-
ness advisory firms and software developers reported 
strong activity. In addition to tax savings and ongoing 
strong confidence, contacts remarked that their services 
were in demand because businesses were modernizing 
their IT infrastructures and attempting to understand the 
implications of worker scarcities. Capital investments 
held steady, although one financial consultant remarked 
that Chinese capital controls had caused an expected 
investment to fall through. Transportation firms reported 
continued increases in freight volumes. Railroad con-
tacts attributed some of their volume growth to ongoing 
capacity constraints in the trucking industry. One truck-
ing contact noted an increase in demand for home deliv-
eries. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Since the previous Beige Book, the Fifth District economy has continued to expand at a moderate pace. Manufacturing 
activity remained strong although firms reported rising input prices and shipping delays. Trucking firms experienced 
robust growth and struggled to find drivers and keep up with demand. The volume of goods moving through District ports 
remained high. Travel and tourism were strong in recent weeks; however, some businesses were unable to provide 
services due to labor shortages. Retail and auto sales strengthened but firms continued to report concerns over increas-
ing shipping delays and costs. Residential real estate activity increased modestly, and existing home sales continued to 
be restrained by low inventory levels. Commercial real estate improved modestly as demand picked up for industrial and 
restaurant leasing but slowed for retail space. Bank lending increased modestly, overall, especially for commercial loans. 
Nonfinancial services firms reported a moderate increase in demand. Hiring increased at a moderate rate as the job 
market remained tight. Price growth accelerated slightly but remained moderate, overall.  
Employment and Wages  
Labor demand strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks, and employment agencies reported growth in 
new job openings across all the industry segments they 
service. Employers continued to report tight labor mar-
kets, while candidates increasingly receive multiple jobs 
offers. Firms reported difficulty filling positions for me-
chanics, construction workers, engineers, commercial 
lenders, treasury and risk managers, accountants, IT 
personnel, hospitality workers, and skilled trade posi-
tions. While wage increases remained modest across 
sectors, reports suggested that wage pressures in-
creased further. 
Prices  
Price growth accelerated slightly in recent weeks but 
remained moderate, overall. According to our most 
recent surveys, manufacturers’ input prices increased 
sharply. In particular, prices for raw materials such as 
steel, aluminum, polyester, wool, acrylic, lumber, and 
caustic soda were on the rise. Manufacturers selling 
prices rose moderately, overall; however, several firms 
mentioned being unable to pass higher input costs 
through to consumers. On the whole, service sector 
firms indicated a moderate increase in prices paid that 
slightly outpaced growth of selling prices. Metallurgical 
and thermal coal prices picked up in recent weeks, as 
did crude oil prices. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing remained fairly strong. However, several 
manufacturers reported that while sales increased, prof-
its dipped as price increases could not offset the rising 
costs of materials and transportation. Manufacturers also 
expressed concern about the potential adverse effects of 
rising trade tensions. For example, a District foam manu-
facturer reported growth in business but growing costs of 
raw materials resulting from tariffs. Additionally, a Mary-
land can manufacturer said he could not get the quality 
of steel needed domestically and anticipated losing 
business to foreign competitors who are not faced with 
steel tariffs.   
Ports and Transportation 
Port activity was strong and continued to grow in recent 
weeks. While export volumes fluctuated, imports contin-
ued to increase throughout the District, with ports seeing 
robust year-over-year growth. An executive from one 
port reported cutting back on volumes to allow for easier 
flow during the port’s expansion. One port saw growth in 
auto exports as demand for used cars increased in oil-
rich countries. In recent months, a District airport quadru-
pled the number of weekly flights to Europe to accommo-
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

E-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond   
date demand for cargo transportation. In addition, its 
domestic business continued to grow, owing largely to 
increasing e-commerce shipments. 
Trucking firms continued to see strong growth and rec-
ord-setting months. A Virginia freight hauler increased 
its fleet while other companies around the District said 
they would expand more if they could hire more drivers. 
Meanwhile, a North Carolina company built new distribu-
tion centers to increase capacity. As trucking firms again 
struggled to meet demand, they were able to increase 
rates. Demand remained strong for nearly every type of 
cargo, although a company in North Carolina reported 
particularly strong growth in retail goods.  
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Tourism remained robust in the District since our last 
report. National parks saw large increases in the number 
of visitors, and some restaurants experienced record 
business. Rental properties in North Carolina began to 
offer shorter stays in order to compete with other short-
term rentals. Meanwhile, a few North Carolina hotels 
reported that occupancy rates remained high despite an 
unprecedented supply of rooms as more hotels opened. 
Several firms struggled to find employees; a Virginia 
resort was unable to open pools for the summer be-
cause of a lack of lifeguards, and a large hotel reserva-
tion center in South Carolina closed because of a labor 
shortage. 
District retailers experienced strong sales in recent 
weeks. A Virginia auto dealer reported a noticeable 
uptick in business, and a North Carolina auto dealer 
attributed high sales growth to manufacturer incentives. 
A Maryland hardware store saw growing business, even 
as competition increased, and worked to improve its 
online presence with more sophisticated pricing technol-
ogy. A West Virginia material handling equipment retail-
er reported that strong demand for goods was leading to 
shrinking inventory, a concern echoed by retailers 
around the District. Retailers also expressed concerns 
over trucking shortages, which are causing long lead 
times and higher shipping expenses.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate firms indicated modest growth, 
overall. Home sales rose modestly in recent weeks, 
although low levels of inventory persisted and buyer 
traffic slowed. District agents said that new listings con-
tinued to sell quickly. Meanwhile, residential construction 
activity reportedly picked up in southern Maryland, and 
demand for new homes strengthened in the Carolinas. 
However, builders continued to report that new home 
production timelines were behind schedule as there 
were not enough workers and available lots to keep up 
with the increased demand.  
Commercial real estate leasing and sales rose modestly 
in recent weeks. District brokers reported increased 
demand for industrial space and a pickup in restaurant 
leasing, while retail activity slowed slightly. New commer-
cial office construction was soft, despite reports of some 
build-to-suit projects. Agents said that office and retail 
landlords were offering fewer incentives and conces-
sions had tightened. Vacancy rates remained low across 
sub-markets, and a few brokers noted a lack of available 
product. Commercial rental rates were generally report-
edly as stable to increasing modestly. Multifamily leasing 
remained healthy, overall.  
Banking and Finance 
On the whole, loan volumes increased modestly since 
our previous report. Residential mortgage demand grew 
at a modest pace; however, the low inventory of homes 
for sale continued to restrain mortgage loan growth. A 
banker in Virginia stated that business was particularly 
strong for new home construction and home equity lines 
to fund remodeling and refurbishing of existing homes. 
Commercial lending activity rose moderately in recent 
weeks. Loan growth was broadly based as bankers 
noted increased demand for agriculture, commercial, 
industrial, small business, commercial real estate devel-
opment, and multifamily construction loans. Deposits 
rose moderately, on balance. Bankers said that competi-
tion for deposits had strengthened considerably and that 
interest rates moved higher. Credit quality remained 
strong while credit standards were generally unchanged.  
Nonfinancial Services 
Since our previous report, the demand for nonfinancial 
services increased moderately, on balance. Specifically, 
demand picked up for telecommunication, administrative 
and support, technology, education, health, and legal 
services. A law firm said that some of the new business 
was due to the implementation of the EU’s General Data 
Protection Regulation law that went into effect in May. 
Meanwhile, a defense contractor reported strong growth 
in recent months and was optimistic about the near 
future based on the recently approved federal budget. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, reports from Sixth District business contacts indicated that economic activity continued to expand at a 
modest pace from mid-May through June. Although a number of contacts’ sentiment declined due to uncertainty related 
to the impact of tariffs and tariff rhetoric, the overall outlook among businesses remains positive as most expect an 
increase in activity for the second half of the year. District firms continued to report difficulties filling positions with quality 
labor. On balance, wage growth remained steady. Businesses continued to report an increase in select non-labor input 
costs. District merchants noted sales activity increased since the previous reporting period and sales of light trucks and 
small SUVs improved from a year ago. The tourism sector experienced solid activity throughout most of the District. 
Real estate contacts noted that new home sales were up slightly and existing home sales were flat to slightly down 
compared to a year earlier. Overall, the housing market experienced modest price appreciation. Commercial real estate 
contacts indicated that activity was solid. Manufacturers reported growth in new orders and increasing production levels.     
Employment and Wages  
Broadly, business contacts across the District cited low 
availability of quality labor as a growing challenge. Con-
tacts noted that this was a problem often not solved by 
increasing pay but by focusing on developing and train-
ing internal staff. Although firms in particular geographies 
struggled to fill certain positions, overall, most continued 
to add to headcounts. Some contacts cited persistent 
challenges with turnover; as a result, they were increas-
ingly investing resources in retention efforts. 
The intensity of wage adjustments remained mixed 
across the region. On average, three percent annual 
increases were the norm; however, a growing number of 
firms noted that when they were not able to meet de-
mand with existing staff, wage increases were around 
five to ten percent (or greater) as an effort to attract and 
retain workers. Business contacts continued to report 
using benefits, bonuses, incentives, and other forms of 
compensation that are temporary or can be withdrawn if 
necessary.       
Prices  
District firms reported some increases in non-labor input 
costs, particularly for steel, aluminum, and transporta-
tion, with limited accounts of an ability to pass along 
these increases. Expectations of rising costs related to 
tariffs continued to contribute to vendor price increases 
for commodities. The Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation 
Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit costs 
were up 2.0 percent in June. Looking ahead, survey 
respondents indicated that they expect unit costs to rise 
2.1 percent over the next twelve months.          
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
On balance, District retailers reported an increase in 
sales levels compared to the last report. Discount stores 
and on-line sales continued to be a leading competitive 
driver in the industry. Vehicle dealers reported an uptick 
in the level of sales of light trucks and small SUVs for the 
month of May compared to the same time period last 
year. 
Tourism activity for the summer season across the Dis-
trict was described as healthy. The hotel market in south 
Florida continued to experience strong demand. While 
this was on par with expectations, there were some 
opportunities for growth based on higher-than-expected 
demand in weekend leisure and group bookings. Con-
tacts in New Orleans reported an uptick in the number of 
conventions being held in the city over the summer. Year
-to-date Mississippi casino gaming revenue increased 
compared to the same time period last year.     
Construction and Real Estate 
On balance, reports from District residential real estate 
contacts indicated modest but ongoing growth. Many 
builders reported that construction activity was up from 
the year-ago level. The majority of builders noted that 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
buyer traffic was up with sales slightly higher, while 
several brokers indicated there was no change in buyer 
traffic relative to the year-earlier level and that sales 
were flat to down slightly. Reports on inventory levels 
were mixed and most brokers and builders reported 
home price gains. District brokers and builders expect 
that home sales activity over the next three months will 
primarily hold steady. 
Many District commercial real estate contacts noted 
continued strong demand. Contacts cited that vacancy 
rates have been steady or falling and the rate of conces-
sions had been steady over the last 90 days. The majori-
ty of commercial contractors indicated that, on balance, 
the pace of nonresidential construction activity at least 
matched the year-ago level, with the exception of multi-
family construction which was characterized as un-
changed to down. Most contacts reported a healthy 
pipeline of activity, with backlogs greater than or equal to 
the previous year. The outlook for nonresidential and 
multifamily construction among commercial construction 
contacts across the District remained positive, with the 
majority anticipating activity to match or exceed the 
current level. 
Manufacturing 
The majority of District manufacturing contacts described 
overall business activity as solid during the reporting 
period. Firms indicated that growth in new orders was 
strong and that production levels were increasing. Pur-
chasing managers reported that supply delivery times 
were getting notably longer and finished inventory levels 
were rising. Relative to the previous reporting period, 
expectations for future production were less upbeat, with 
about one-third of contacts expecting higher production 
over the next six months.         
Transportation 
Transportation activity was largely unchanged since the 
previous report. District port contacts continued to note 
significant year-over-year increases in containerized 
shipments, and bulk and breakbulk cargoes; automobile 
and equipment freight also rose. Trucking companies 
noted an increase in activity from year earlier levels; 
demand for freight services was high, which was attribut-
ed to an improved economy and increased e-commerce 
shipments. Trucking capacity remained tight due to a 
lack of skilled truck drivers. Contacts at District railroads 
noted that total traffic year-to-date was flat to slightly 
down as compared with the same period last year, but 
intermodal activity saw a modest uptick. Most transporta-
tion contacts expect higher levels of activity over the 
second half of the year.          
 
Banking and Finance  
District financial institutions’ earnings normalized follow-
ing a quarter when earnings were negatively impacted 
by tax reform. Asset growth slowed as higher interest 
rates impacted some loan demand, especially for real 
estate products. Asset quality metrics at financial institu-
tions were strong. Transaction accounts remained a 
significant portion of the deposit base and provided the 
majority of funding, but borrowings were steadily rising 
as asset growth recently started to outpace deposit 
growth. Financial institutions in urban markets note a 
greater level of deposit pressure in contrast to more rural 
markets where deposits are stable.           
Energy  
Overall, District energy sector activity continued to pick 
up. Industrial projects were reported across the District. 
Onshore shale drilling activity remained strong. Although 
offshore exploration and production remained subdued, 
there was a slight uptick in activity over the reporting 
period. Production and exports of refined chemical prod-
ucts and crude oil continued to grow as refineries in-
creased capacity. Contacts from the utilities sector noted 
that the industrial segment still outpaced residential and 
commercial growth.        
Agriculture 
Agriculture conditions across the District were mixed. 
Significant rain improved drought conditions in Alabama, 
Florida, and Georgia; however, there were abnormally 
dry conditions reported mostly in Louisiana and to a 
lesser degree in Mississippi and Tennessee.  There 
were also some areas that experienced above-normal 
temperatures and locally heavy rains, resulting in some 
crop stress. June’s forecast for Florida’s orange crop 
was unchanged from May, but down significantly from 
last season’s production. On a year-over-year basis, 
prices paid to farmers in April were up for corn, rice, 
soybeans, broilers, and eggs and down for cotton and 
beef. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Growth in economic activity in the Seventh District slowed to a modest pace in late May and June, though contacts 
expected it to pick up to a moderate pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Manufacturing production increased moderate-
ly, while employment, consumer spending, business spending, and construction and real estate activity grew modestly. 
Wages and prices increased modestly, and financial conditions improved modestly. The outlook for agricultural income 
dimmed some as prices for most commodities fell. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment growth slowed to a modest pace over the 
reporting period, and contacts expected gains to contin-
ue at that rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Hiring was 
focused on production and professional and technical 
workers, though there was also an increase in the num-
ber of firms seeking to hire sales workers. As they have 
for some time, contacts indicated that the labor market 
was tight and reported difficulties filling positions at all 
skill levels. Manufacturers continued to report that they 
had delayed or turned down projects because of difficul-
ties in finding workers. A staffing firm that primarily sup-
plies manufacturers with production workers reported no 
change in billable hours. Wage growth remained modest 
overall, with wage increases most likely to be reported 
for managerial, professional and technical, and produc-
tion workers. Most firms reported rising benefits costs. 
Prices 
The pace of price increases edged up in late May and 
June, but remained modest overall. Contacts expected 
prices to continue to rise modestly over the next 6 to 12 
months. Retail prices increased slightly overall. Producer 
prices rose modestly, reflecting in part the pass-through 
of higher labor, materials, energy, and freight costs. 
Contacts in the agricultural sector noted heightened 
price volatility related to uncertainty over U.S. and for-
eign tariff policies. 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly over the report-
ing period. Nonauto retail sales rose modestly, with 
gains in the grocery, hardware, home improvement, 
jewelry, and personal services segments and declines in 
the furniture and sporting goods segments. Light vehicle 
sales increased slightly and used vehicle sales rose 
moderately. A number of contacts indicated that vehicle 
sales for the first half of 2018 had exceeded expecta-
tions. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased modestly in late May and 
June. Retail contacts indicated that inventories were 
generally at comfortable levels. Most manufacturing 
contacts did so as well, though a fabricated metals con-
tact indicated that inventories were low because many of 
his firm’s suppliers were capacity constrained. In addi-
tion, steel service center inventories remained below 
historical norms. Capital spending increased modestly 
and contacts expected growth to continue at that pace 
over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were primarily for 
replacing industrial and IT equipment and for renovating 
structures. Contacts again indicated that lead times for 
purchasing new equipment were elevated. Demand for 
energy from commercial and industrial users increased 
modestly, and demand for transportation services in-
creased moderately from an already high level. 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity increased modestly 
over the reporting period. Residential construction in-
creased slightly, led by growth in suburban single-family 
homebuilding. Home sales were up modestly overall, 
though a contact in the Detroit area reported slower 
sales. Contacts across the District indicated that low 
inventories of starter homes continued to hold back 
sales. Home prices increased moderately overall and 
rents rose modestly. The pace of nonresidential con-
struction was little changed. Commercial real estate 
activity increased modestly, led by growth in the industri-
al sector. One contact noted that demand for office 
space from technology firms was strong. Commercial 
rents increased modestly, vacancy rates declined mod-
estly, and the availability of sublease space increased 
slightly. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production increased at a moderate rate 
in late May and June. A number of contacts across man-
ufacturing sectors reported operating at or near capacity. 
Steel production increased moderately in response to 
steady end-user demand and declining imports. One 
contact said that demand for domestic steel was the 
strongest it had been in 20 years. Demand for heavy 
machinery and heavy trucks continued to grow at a solid 
pace. Order books for specialty metals manufacturers 
increased modestly, helped by strong demand from the 
oil and gas sector. Manufacturers of construction materi-
als continued to report slow but steady increases in 
shipments, in line with the pace of improvement in con-
struction. Auto production increased modestly and re-
mained at a solid level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly over the report-
ing period. Financial market participants reported little 
change in equities prices or volatility, but some increase 
in short-term interest rates. Business loan demand in-
creased slightly, with growth predominantly coming from 
small businesses. Loans were primarily for financing real 
estate and capital equipment. One contact noted slightly 
higher balances on business lines of credit due to higher 
input costs for energy and metals. Loan quality and 
lending standards were little changed. Consumer loan 
demand also increased slightly, driven by increases in 
loans for autos and other durable goods and in mortgag-
es. Consumer loan quality and lending standards were 
little changed. Contacts reported a high level of competi-
tion for both business and consumer loans. 
Agriculture 
The outlook for agriculture income dimmed some over 
the reporting period as prices for most commodities fell. 
Crop farmers reported that in general, field conditions 
were excellent and better than last year. Both corn and 
soybean prices fell, reducing expected profits from the 
upcoming harvest. Livestock farmers continued to strug-
gle overall, with some reports of asset sales by hog 
producers and closures of dairy operations. Contacts 
throughout the District expressed heightened concerns 
about the impact of trade disputes and tariffs on the 
agricultural industry. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions in the District have improved slightly since our previous report. Firms reported modest increases in 
employment despite continued difficulties finding workers. Wages continued to increase modestly. Price pressures have 
increased modestly as freight costs have increased across all sectors. Reports from consumer spending contacts re-
mained mixed. Manufacturers reported increases in production and new orders. Residential real estate activity improved 
modestly while construction activity picked up slightly. District bankers reported increased lending activity as commercial 
and industrial loan growth continued to be robust. Agriculture and natural resources conditions have been relatively 
unchanged since the previous report.   
Employment and Wages  
Employment has increased modestly since the previous 
report. Several manufacturing companies, including 
multiple steel producers, announced plans to expand 
and hire new employees. Furthermore, survey-based 
employment indexes indicated modest increases in June 
manufacturing employment across Missouri and Arkan-
sas. To attract and retain employees, firms reported 
lowering hiring standards, offering more-generous non-
wage benefits, and establishing training programs 
through partnerships with local schools and non-profit 
organizations. Contacts noted difficulties filling construc-
tion and trucking positions in particular. 
Wages have increased modestly since the previous 
report. Contacts reported that the continued tight labor 
market has led to increased wages in the services sec-
tor, particularly for entry-level positions. Retail and food-
service firms reported having to raise wages of existing 
employees to match the higher rates for new employees. 
One trucking company offered the largest one-time pay 
increase in its history. Wages paid by small business in 
the St. Louis metro area grew slightly.     
Prices  
Price pressures have increased modestly in general 
since the previous report. Local contacts reported robust 
increases in shipping costs across all sectors due to 
higher fuel prices and driver shortages. Tariffs and trade 
restrictions have had a mixed effect on prices. U.S.-
imposed tariffs have raised the prices of steel and alumi-
num, increasing input costs for several business con-
tacts. Those contacts in construction lamented that rising 
prices pressured the industry before this tariff-induced 
inflation of metal costs. In contrast, proposed tariffs by 
China have led to an overall downturn in agricultural 
commodity prices, particularly the price of soybeans. 
These lower agricultural commodity prices have been 
passed on to food retailers, who reported that lower food 
prices have more than offset increased freight costs.    
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate mixed consumer spending activity. Real 
sales tax collections modestly increased in Arkansas 
relative to a year ago, but declined slightly in Missouri, 
Kentucky, and West Tennessee. The consumer outlook 
in West Tennessee has improved since the first quarter, 
and households, on net, expect to increase spending in 
the next few months relative to a year ago. Retailers in 
Tennessee indicated that year-to-date sales have been 
above last year’s levels and expect this trend to continue 
through the rest of the year. In response to the recent 
Supreme Court ruling, internet-based retailers indicated 
that they will likely “eat the cost” from collecting sales tax 
in the medium term. However, they expect to pass the 
cost to consumers in the long run through the prices they 
charge for shipping and by changing eligibility for free 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
shipping. 
Reports from auto dealers were mixed: Memphis auto 
dealers reported an increase in sales year over year, 
while dealers in Louisville and Little Rock reported a 
decrease. Memphis and Little Rock auto dealers also 
indicated a shift in demand toward SUVs and crosso-
vers. Hoteliers in Little Rock and Memphis reported 
strong and stable demand, and St. Louis hospitality 
contacts continued to express a positive outlook for the 
coming months.    
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased at a moderate pace 
since our previous report. Overall manufacturing activity 
was stronger than one month earlier in both Arkansas 
and Missouri, and the pace of expansion increased in 
each. New orders and production also rose in both 
states. Several companies that manufacture motor vehi-
cles and motor vehicle parts reported plans to expand 
facilities and increase production. Contacts in the paper 
packaging manufacturing industry reported running at 
nearly full capacity. Similarly, contacts in the recycled 
metal industry noted record volumes, and contacts in the 
mining equipment manufacturing industry reported expe-
riencing backlogs. On the other hand, a manufacturer of 
plastic products for appliances indicated that sales were 
down. Several manufacturers noted increases in input 
prices, which they linked to tariffs.    
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the service sector has improved slightly since 
the previous report. The number of posted vacancies for 
nonfinancial services occupations in May was generally 
unchanged in Louisville and Memphis relative to the prior 
month and increased moderately in St. Louis. Arkansas 
air passenger transit and river barge traffic volumes were 
somewhat lower compared with the previous year, while 
Louisville air passenger transit volume remained flat. 
Contacts noted that a continuing shortage of commercial 
truck drivers has led to higher demand for railroad ship-
ping.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has improved modestly 
since the previous report. Seasonally adjusted home 
sales were slightly higher in April. Inventory levels re-
mained low, and contacts continued to report a shortage 
of homes in the market with newly listed homes selling 
quickly.  
Residential construction activity has improved slightly. 
Permit activity in May was flat relative to the prior month. 
A contact in Louisville reported seeing a robust level of 
new construction under way, and a contact in Little Rock 
noted that a healthy demand for single-family homes has 
led to new prospective developments. St. Louis builders 
expect 2018 permits to exceed the total from last year. 
Commercial real estate activity has been unchanged 
since the previous report. Contacts in Little Rock report-
ed that the market is generally healthy across most 
property types but were apprehensive over how future 
interest rate increases may impact profits and cash 
flows. 
Commercial construction activity was flat. Some contacts 
in Little Rock expressed concerns that new hotel con-
struction under way risks oversaturating the market. A 
Louisville contact reported continued robust multifamily 
construction.     
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have improved at a 
moderate pace since the previous report. Outstanding 
loan volumes at small and mid-sized banks grew by 6 
percent relative to year-ago levels in the second quarter, 
down from 7 percent in the first quarter and continuing 
the steady decline in the rate of loan growth since the 
end of 2016. Commercial and industrial lending re-
mained strong, growing by 12 percent in year-over-year 
terms, double the national rate. In contrast, residential 
real estate lending grew slowly and lagged behind that of 
the nation for the second consecutive quarter. Bankers 
also continued to report sluggish deposit growth.    
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Agriculture conditions weakened slightly from the previ-
ous reporting period, but improved slightly from the same 
time last year. The percentages of corn, cotton, and rice 
rated fair or better in June declined slightly relative to the 
prior month, while that of soybeans increased modestly. 
However, both the corn and soybeans percentages were 
higher than a year ago, the cotton percentage was little 
changed, and the rice percentage was down slightly. 
Estimated soybean acreage saw a substantial upward 
adjustment in Illinois relative to March planting intentions 
but was revised downward in Missouri.  
Natural resource extraction conditions were essentially 
unchanged from May to June, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production up 0.1 percent. However, June produc-
tion was 6 percent below prior-year levels. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew moderately overall since the last report. Employment grew modestly, with robust hiring 
demand continuing to be restrained by tight labor supply. Wage and price pressures were moderate since the previous 
report. The District economy showed growth in manufacturing, residential construction, commercial real estate, energy, 
and tourism. But consumer spending and commercial construction were mixed, residential real estate slowed, and 
agriculture remained weak. 
Employment and Wages 
Employment grew modestly since the last report. Hiring 
demand remained robust, but continued to be restrained 
by tight labor supply. May job openings in North Dakota 
and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan were both notably 
higher than a year earlier. A jobs database for 
Minneapolis-St. Paul showed that new postings for the 
second quarter were up significantly over the same 
period last year. An ad hoc poll of large firms in 
Minnesota found that roughly half were currently hiring to 
add to head count and expected that to continue over 
the coming year. A May survey of manufacturing firms 
showed strong hiring sentiment among respondents in 
Minnesota and the Dakotas. However, tight labor 
restricted firms’ ability to find workers. May 
unemployment rates dropped across the District 
compared with the previous month and a year ago. 
District states saw a 13 percent decrease in initial 
unemployment claims during the most recent six-week 
period (though mid-June) compared with the same 
period last year. Continuing claims also dropped slightly. 
State workforce development offices widely reported 
relatively stable or higher job postings, but fewer job 
seekers. In Montana, May job postings with the state 
rose by 2 percent over a year earlier, while active job 
seekers fell by 21 percent. A Montana staffing firm 
reported that “hiring demand and job orders are up, but 
[worker] candidates are down.”  
Wage pressure was moderate overall, though recent 
union contracts reflected larger increases. A Minneapolis 
Fed poll of South Dakota retailers found recent wage 
increases coalescing around 2 percent to 3 percent, with 
roughly similar expectations for the coming year. A poll 
of large Minnesota firms showed slightly stronger results. 
Four recent union construction contracts in Minnesota 
negotiated annual increases ranging from about 3 
percent to 5 percent per year for three years. A new 
contract for union service workers at a Minnesota health 
care provider raised wages between 7 percent and 10 
percent over three years; a contract for union utility 
workers in the Upper Peninsula awarded raises of 11 
percent to 14 percent over three years.   
Prices  
Price pressures increased moderately relative to the 
previous report. Manufacturing contacts reported that 
steep increases continued in aluminum and steel 
material input costs in reaction to tariff announcements. 
Construction materials costs continued to increase 
briskly. A June survey of purchasing managers indicated 
that inflation expectations were elevated, but decreased 
slightly from the previous month. Retail fuel prices as of 
late June were mixed across District states relative to the 
previous reporting period; Montana and the Dakotas saw 
prices increase slightly, while prices in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin fell. Prices received by farmers for corn, 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
soybeans, wheat, hay, chickens, and eggs increased in 
May compared with a year earlier; prices for hogs, cattle, 
milk, and turkeys decreased.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
Consumer spending was mixed since the last report. 
Official tax data suggested some slowing. For example, 
sales tax collections in May were 5 percent lower in 
Minnesota compared with a year earlier, while taxable 
sales were flat in South Dakota. A contact at a restaurant 
industry association described recent sales as generally 
up moderately.  
Tourism activity increased moderately. A survey of 
Minnesota businesses revealed solid optimism for the 
summer tourism season, with significantly more 
respondents expecting higher revenues compared with 
those expecting lower revenues. Minnesota’s hotel 
sector also had a very strong May, with demand 
increasing 7 percent over a year earlier. Said an industry 
contact, “It looks like this will be a good summer for the 
state’s hotel industry.” Lodging and accommodation tax 
collections in Montana have been higher every month 
this year, including May, compared with 2017. Gaming 
receipts from casinos in Spearfish, S.D., were down 
about 4 percent during the spring months, but summer 
bookings at hotels and campgrounds in the region were 
up, according to local officials.  
Services 
Activity in the professional services industry increased 
moderately since the last report. Respondents to the 
Minneapolis Fed’s annual services survey indicated 
growth in sales, profits, productivity, and employment 
over the past year, with expectations for more growth in 
the coming 12 months. In contrast, several architecture 
contacts said business had decreased recently.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was mixed since the last 
report. An industry database showed that commercial 
and heavy construction spending in May rose overall 
compared with a year earlier, particularly in North Dakota 
and Minnesota, while South Dakota was flat. A 
contractor in southeastern Minnesota said current 
activity levels were “much better” compared with last 
year. However, another database of new and active 
projects across multiple states in the District showed that 
recent activity levels through mid-June were slightly 
lower than the same period a year earlier. The value of 
commercial permitting in May was also mixed among the 
District’s larger cities. Residential construction rose 
modestly overall, though activity varied. Single-family 
permit values rose in Bismarck, N.D., Billings and 
Missoula, Mont., and the Minneapolis-St. Paul region; 
but permit values were flat in Rapid City and Sioux Falls, 
S.D., and lower in Fargo, N.D., and Rochester, Minn. 
Commercial real estate grew modestly since the last 
report. In Minneapolis-St. Paul, multifamily vacancy rates 
continued to be low despite strong delivery of new units 
to the market, though lease rates have been mostly 
steady. Despite the continued closure of large retail 
stores in Minneapolis-St. Paul, this space was being 
absorbed and “keeping vacancies tight,” according to an 
industry source. Residential real estate fell, with a few 
isolated exceptions. May home sales in Minnesota 
dropped 11 percent compared with a year earlier and 
also fell in western and northern regions of Wisconsin, 
and in Bismarck. Sioux Falls sales were flat, and 
Montana metro markets were mixed, with slower May 
sales in Great Falls and Helena, but higher sales in 
Bozeman and Missoula.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased briskly. An index 
of manufacturing conditions indicated increased activity 
in June compared with a month earlier in Minnesota and 
the Dakotas. Contacts from across the manufacturing 
sector reported very strong activity so far this year. A 
dealer of stamping and metal forming machinery said 
that the market for capital equipment was as busy as 
they’d ever seen. Producers of hydraulic equipment 
reported similarly strong demand, with some seeing 
double-digit growth this year.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were stable relative to the 
previous report. Despite a late start to the planting 
season, crop progress in District states as of late June 
was generally in line with five-year averages, and the 
majority of crops were rated in good or excellent 
condition. However, some areas of the Dakotas and 
Montana were experiencing dry or moderate drought 
conditions. Activity in the energy sector increased 
slightly. District oil and gas exploration activity as of late 
June was roughly unchanged from the previous report; 
oil and gas production as of April increased from a 
month earlier. District iron ore mines continued to 
operate at near capacity. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Tenth District continued to increase at a moderate pace in late May and June, and expectations 
were for additional gains in the coming months. Consumer spending and business services activity rose modestly com-
pared to the previous survey period, and residential and commercial real estate activity climbed moderately higher. 
Manufacturing activity continued to expand at a robust pace, and manufacturers and business services contacts antici-
pated stronger capital spending in the months ahead. Banking contacts reported increased loan demand, improved loan 
quality, and slightly lower deposit levels. Respondents in the energy sector reported a slight pickup in overall activity and 
expected strong levels of capital spending. Agricultural conditions weakened slightly as trade uncertainty and expecta-
tions of large supplies put downward pressure on crop prices. Employment increased modestly since the previous sur-
vey period, and a large share of contacts reported labor shortages. Wages, input prices, and selling prices moved mod-
erately higher, and most contacts expected additional increases moving forward. 
Employment and Wages  
District employment and employee hours continued to 
increase at a modest pace in late May and June, and 
additional gains were anticipated in the months ahead. A 
majority of contacts in every sector noted rising levels of 
employment since the previous survey period, with the 
exception of those in the auto sales sector who noted a 
modest decline. In addition to rising employment levels, 
employee hours increased in the retail trade, wholesale 
trade, real estate, restaurant, tourism, manufacturing, 
and energy sectors. A high percentage of contacts in the 
District reported labor shortages for some skillsets, 
especially within the manufacturing sector. In particular, 
contacts noted difficulty finding retail sales staff, skilled 
IT workers, commercial drivers, and restaurant workers.  
Wages increased moderately in most sectors, and firms 
expected a similar pace of growth in the months ahead.  
Prices  
Input and selling prices rose further since the previous 
survey period and were moderately higher than year-ago 
levels. Respondents expected further increases in the 
coming months. Contacts in the retail sector noted mod-
estly higher input and selling prices compared to the 
previous survey period, and both were moderately higher 
than year-ago levels. In the restaurant sector, input 
prices rose modestly and selling prices picked up at a 
moderate pace. Input and selling prices in the transpor-
tation sector were moderately above year-ago levels. 
Construction supply contacts noted moderately higher 
prices, although the rate of growth was expected to slow 
slightly moving forward. Manufacturers reported a mod-
est increase in the prices of finished products, and raw 
materials prices rose moderately. Manufacturers ex-
pected the pace of price increases to accelerate in the 
months ahead for both finished products and raw materi-
als.  
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending increased modestly compared to 
the previous survey period, and firms were optimistic that 
spending will continue to rise. Retail sales rose moder-
ately since the previous survey period and remained 
above year-ago levels. Several retailers noted a pickup 
in sales for appliances, home improvement items, and 
lower-priced goods, while higher-priced products sold 
poorly. Retail contacts anticipated moderate increases in 
sales and modestly higher inventories moving forward. 
Auto sales rose modestly since the previous survey 
period but were slightly below year-ago levels. However, 
dealer contacts expected sales and inventories to rise in 
the months ahead. Restaurant sales edged up slightly 
compared to both the previous survey period and year-
ago levels, and respondents expected modest sales 
growth in the next few months. District tourism activity 
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
expanded at a moderate pace compared to the previous 
survey period, although tourism sales were below year-
ago levels. Tourism activity was anticipated to decline 
modestly in the next few months.  
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity continued to expand robustly, and 
the majority of other business contacts reported modest 
sales increases. Factory activity grew at both durable 
and nondurable goods plants, especially for computer, 
electronics, and food products. Production, shipments, 
and new orders increased moderately, and activity re-
mained higher than a year ago. Manufacturers' capital 
spending plans grew moderately, and manufacturers 
expressed strong optimism about future levels of activity. 
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the professional, high-
tech, wholesale trade, and transportation sectors report-
ed modest sales growth, and expectations were for a 
faster pace of growth in the months ahead. Transporta-
tion contacts anticipated a modest increase in capital 
spending in the coming months, while professional, high-
tech, and wholesale trade firms expressed more robust 
plans for capital expenditures. 
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity rose at a moderate pace, and 
additional growth was expected in the months ahead. 
Contacts in the residential real estate sector noted mod-
erately higher home sales, prices, and inventories com-
pared to year-ago levels. Continued moderate growth 
was expected for home sales and prices, while invento-
ries were projected to remain flat. Residential construc-
tion activity strengthened slightly in late May and June 
including stronger housing starts and sales of construc-
tion supplies. However, traffic of potential buyers de-
clined modestly since last year. Residential construction 
contacts expected a slight pickup in activity in the 
months ahead. The commercial real estate sector grew 
at a moderate pace as absorption, completions, and 
sales rose while vacancy rates declined. Commercial 
real estate activity was projected to expand at a slightly 
faster pace moving forward.  
Banking 
Bankers reported a moderate increase in overall loan 
demand in late May and June. Respondents reported a 
modest increase for commercial and industrial, commer-
cial real estate, residential real estate, consumer install-
ment, and agricultural loans. Bankers indicated loan 
quality improved modestly compared to a year ago and 
expected further improvement in the next six months. 
Credit standards remained largely unchanged in all 
major loan categories, and bankers reported a slight 
decrease in deposit levels.  
 
Energy 
District energy activity expanded slightly since the last 
survey period, while expectations for future activity con-
tinued to grow moderately. The number of active oil rigs 
increased modestly, and the number of active gas rigs 
remained unchanged. Most firms reported continued 
strong capital spending plans, although several busi-
nesses expressed concern about pipeline capacity. 
Despite persistent growth in global oil demand, contacts 
projected slightly lower oil prices which a number of firms 
attributed to the announcement of OPEC’s production 
increases. Expectations for natural gas prices improved 
further. 
Agriculture 
The Tenth District farm economy weakened slightly, and 
drought persisted in some regions. Trade uncertainty 
and expectations of larger supplies in 2018 put down-
ward pressure on crop prices. Corn prices were slightly 
lower than a year ago following a sharp decline in June, 
while soybean prices declined even more rapidly and 
reached an eight-year low. Although prices for wheat 
remained steady and slightly higher than a year ago, 
revenues in Kansas and Oklahoma could remain 
strained as nearly half of winter wheat acreage was 
rated as poor or very poor due to dry conditions. Live-
stock prices were slightly lower than one year ago follow-
ing modest declines in June. Hog prices, which contin-
ued to be supported by expectations of increased U.S. 
exports and relatively strong global demand, increased 
slightly in June but remained slightly below levels from 
one year ago. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Expansion in the Eleventh District economy continued at a solid pace. Manufacturing output increased, and loan de-
mand and retail spending rose. Broad-based expansion in the energy and service sectors continued. Home sales rose 
modestly, while apartment markets softened slightly. The ongoing drought negatively affected crop and grazing condi-
tions. Hiring remained strong, and widespread labor shortages continued putting pressure on wages. Price pressures 
stayed elevated largely due to increases in input costs, particularly steel and aluminum. Although outlooks remained 
fairly optimistic, tariffs and trade-related concerns were creating uncertainty. 
Employment and Wages  
Job growth was solid and widespread across sectors, 
with most firms bullish in their expectations for long-run 
employment. Labor market tightness continued across a 
wide array of industries and skill sets, with several con-
tacts saying difficulty finding workers was constraining 
growth to some extent. Oilfield services firms noted 
shortages of mechanics and truck drivers, and one con-
tact said hiring and retaining workers in the bottom 20 
percent of their payroll was a challenge. A staffing firm 
said they had partnered with a manufacturing company, 
where workers could attend a paid, six-week welding 
course and receive fulltime employment following suc-
cessful completion. Nearly half of the firms responding to 
a set of special questions indicated that new technolo-
gies were not impacting employment levels, although 25 
percent said it was changing the types of workers need-
ed.  
Wage pressures remained elevated, and firms expected 
to give employees a larger increase in wages this year 
compared with 2017. Several firms were employing 
multiple strategies to recruit and retain employees, such 
as intensifying recruiting, raising wages, offering on-the-
job training and/or increasing variable pay/bonus.  
Prices 
Price pressures remained elevated. Input costs in-
creased among energy, manufacturing, and construction 
firms, in part due to rising freight costs and the new 
tariffs on steel, aluminum, and lumber. Auto dealers 
reported higher new vehicle prices and financing costs, 
and transportation service firms noted climbing fuel 
prices. Many other retailers and service firms also cited 
rising input and other costs such as health care. A num-
ber of contacts said they plan on increasing selling pric-
es to offset higher costs. West Texas Intermediate oil 
prices rose to their highest levels since 2014 driven by 
falling inventories, rising geopolitical risks in the Middle 
East, U.S. policy on Iran, and other oil supply concerns. 
Manufacturing  
Expansion in the manufacturing sector continued, alt-
hough the overall pace of growth eased in June from the 
highs seen in May. Output growth was led by transporta-
tion equipment and food manufacturing. Growth in ma-
chinery production receded in June from May's elevated 
rates, while demand for fabricated and primary metals 
increased. Chemical production expanded further, and 
the Gulf Coast refinery utilization rate climbed up to 97.6 
percent toward the end of June. Refiners and chemical 
producers reported optimistic outlooks, buoyed by rela-
tively low domestic feed costs and expectations of 
healthy global demand for their products. Overall, out-
looks among manufacturers remained positive, although 
contacts said that the new tariffs had heightened uncer-
tainty in expectations for activity and prices.  
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
Retail Sales 
Retail sales rose sharply in May but growth slowed in 
June, with many retailers noting either flat or softening 
activity. Internet sales grew moderately over the report-
ing period. Auto sales were strong, but contacts reported 
increased pressure on margins in part due to rising 
financing costs among other expenses. Sales increased 
among durable goods wholesalers, while falling for non-
durables. While outlooks overall remained positive, rising 
interest rates and the newly imposed tariffs were nega-
tively impacting some retailers’ expectations. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Growth in nonfinancial services activity was broad based 
across industries. Strong revenue growth among trans-
portation services and finance and insurance firms 
boosted service sector activity. Rail traffic remained 
close to record levels, with shipments increasing broadly 
across business lines. Air cargo volumes expanded as 
well, in part due to a pickup in international shipments. 
Airline passenger demand was stable, and leisure and 
hospitality contacts saw a pickup in activity. Revenue 
growth in the professional and business services sector 
was solid, with staffing services firms noting persistently 
high demand, driven by widespread increases in activity 
across geographies and sectors. Expectations regarding 
future business conditions remained optimistic, although 
higher fuel prices, rising costs, labor shortages, and 
uncertainty surrounding trade policies were sources of 
concern among contacts.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Home sales edged up over the reporting period, with 
year-to-date sales on or ahead of plan for most builders. 
Buyers remained price sensitive, putting pressure on 
builders’ margins. Contacts expressed trepidation about 
the impact of rising interest rates and uncertainty sur-
rounding trade and immigration policies on future activity 
and/or costs. Nevertheless, outlooks remained positive. 
A large number of new apartments are putting pressure 
on rents, particularly in areas where there was a lot of 
availability. Rent growth in Dallas and Austin was mod-
est and below its long run average, though occupancy 
was generally holding up well. A slowing pace of deliver-
ies combined with a pickup in economic growth has 
boosted occupancy and rent growth in Houston. Invest-
ment activity remained solid despite the recent softening 
in overall performance.  
Net absorption in DFW’s office market improved in the 
second quarter but remained modest compared with the 
highs seen last year. Office leasing activity was steady in 
San Antonio, but remained sluggish in Houston. Condi-
tions in industrial markets were characterized as solid, 
and reports on demand for retail space mostly indicated 
flat but healthy levels of activity.  
Financial Services 
Loan volumes and demand expanded over the reporting 
period. Growth remained broad based, with continued 
strength in commercial and residential real estate lend-
ing. Consumer loan volumes increased slightly, and 
commercial and industrial loan volumes grew at a slower 
pace than during the last reporting period. Loan pricing 
rose further, and credit standards remained unchanged 
or tightened moderately. The volume of deposits ticked 
up, and some contacts noted raising rates to compete for 
deposits. Outlooks remained optimistic, although regula-
tory compliance, difficulty expanding the existing deposit 
base, and potential inversion of the yield curve were 
concerns cited by banking contacts. 
Energy 
Energy sector activity expanded strongly. Demand for 
oilfield services rose further, and firms noted increased 
equipment utilization. Drilling activity ticked up in the 
District even as the U.S. rig count dipped. Expectations 
regarding future business conditions remained positive, 
supported by a favorable outlook for oil prices, but con-
tacts expressed concern about steel tariffs, pipeline 
capacity constraints, and worker shortages. 
Agriculture 
Drought conditions became slightly less severe but more 
widespread over the reporting period. Texas farmers 
were concerned because the drought will likely suppress 
crop yields, and crop prices are lower due to trade re-
strictions and strong U.S. production prospects. Grazing 
conditions remained well below average, and cattle 
prices experienced a slightly higher-than-average sea-
sonal decline over the last six weeks, despite strong 
export and domestic demand for beef. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of mid-May 
through June. Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and wage pressures picked up. Price inflation increased 
moderately. Sales of retail goods picked up slightly, while activity in consumer and business services edged down. 
Activity in the manufacturing sector remained solid, and conditions in the agriculture sector deteriorated modestly. Con-
tacts reported that residential real estate market activity expanded at a solid pace, and activity in the commercial real 
estate sector was also solid. Lending activity ticked up moderately. 
Employment and Wages  
Tight labor market conditions persisted across all sec-
tors, leading to a pickup in wage growth. Contacts con-
tinued to report challenges retaining workers. In the 
Mountain West, a few major national employers attracted 
low-skilled warehouse workers from smaller businesses 
that could not match their starting wages. Across the 
District, contacts observed higher starting salaries and 
increased bonuses to attract skilled financial service and 
information technology professionals. Demand for skilled 
lending officers increased moderately due to stronger 
loan growth over the reporting period. Shortages of 
plumbers, electricians, and other specialized workers 
drove wage pressures for these positions and led to 
construction project delays in some cases. A contact in 
Oregon’s banking sector reported an uptick in lending to 
manufacturers for automation projects to stem increases 
in labor costs that have weakened profitability. Crop 
harvesting and processing businesses noted difficulties 
hiring for on-site managerial positions in rural areas. A 
contact in financial services in central California reported 
that employment levels fell slightly as the number of 
mergers and acquisitions in the region picked up, creat-
ing some job redundancies. 
Prices  
Price inflation increased moderately over the reporting 
period. Recent oil price increases spurred price inflation 
in a variety of sectors. Pricing pressures strengthened 
for freight costs at lumber businesses in California and 
Oregon and for petroleum-based products like asphalt. 
Across the District, contacts noted a pickup in price 
growth for finished steel and for metal inputs to manufac-
tured products. A few contacts in manufacturing attribut-
ed recent inflationary pressures for metal products and 
declines in the duration of price guarantees to the imple-
mentation of tariffs. Solid construction sector activity 
continued to exert upward pressure on prices for building 
materials. Contacts in California reported moderate price 
inflation for cherries, nuts, and raisins after yields fell due 
to poor growing conditions. A few contacts reported that 
grocery stores passed on increased food safety costs to 
consumers, increasing food prices somewhat. Excess 
capacity in power generation and low input costs contin-
ued to limit increases in electricity prices in Southern 
California. Generic drug prices continued to fall modestly 
due to a relaxation in regulation and heightened competi-
tion among the largest drug sellers.  
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods picked up slightly over the reporting 
period. Contacts in the Mountain West reported an over-
all increase in vehicle sales in the region, with truck 
sales lagging passenger car sales somewhat. Demand 
at consumer hardware and home improvement stores 
increased moderately. In the food and beverage indus-
try, contacts reported flat sales at grocery stores.   
The Beige Book ■ July 2018 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
edged down. Sales at quick service restaurants were 
generally flat. In the Mountain West, the livestock health 
services sector saw growth slow moderately because of 
disruptions to the medication supply chain. Activity at 
transportation businesses was constrained slightly due 
to continued shortages of truck drivers. Growth in the 
pharmaceutical industry slowed modestly as continued 
deflationary pressures for generic drug prices negatively 
affected profitability at producers of branded drugs.    
Manufacturing 
Activity in the manufacturing sector remained solid. A 
contact in the Mountain West noted that demand from 
the mining industry for equipment jumped, leading busi-
nesses to expand operations. Deliveries of commercial 
aircraft increased noticeably from the same period last 
year, while new orders grew moderately. A steel produc-
er in Oregon observed that there was sufficient capacity 
to meet the continued elevated demand for their prod-
ucts. 
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector deteriorated modest-
ly. In California, yields for various crops fell because of 
weak precipitation levels in recent months. In the Moun-
tain West, feedlot profits fell noticeably on a year-over-
year basis, and profits at dairy and pork producers de-
clined moderately. A pickup in global demand for raisins 
and nuts resulted in a slight increase in exports of these 
crops. Potato yields in Idaho were solid, and inventory 
levels improved from the same period last year.   
Real Estate and Construction 
Activity in real estate markets expanded at a solid pace. 
Construction in the residential market was strong, con-
strained only by the shortage of labor and rising material 
costs. Contacts across the District reported that home 
prices and residential rents picked up due to still-low 
inventory levels and strong demand. In the Mountain 
West, price growth was most evident at more affordable 
price points where inventory was especially low. A con-
tact in the Seattle area noted that listing durations for 
single-family houses continued to trend downward due to 
brisk selling activity. A few contacts noted that rising 
borrowing costs might limit demand, although there was 
no tangible impact over the reporting period. Commercial 
real estate activity was also solid. In Oregon, construc-
tion starts for industrial and warehouse spaces picked up 
noticeably, as did leasing demand for these spaces. 
Contacts in Southern California reported that commercial 
rents and sales prices increased moderately.  
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity ticked up moderately over the reporting 
period. Loan demand increased overall, with contacts 
across the District reporting solid loan growth. Deposit 
growth picked up in the Mountain West. Contacts in 
California and Oregon observed strong asset quality and 
liquidity levels. A few contacts noted tighter lending 
standards for borrowers in the agriculture sector be-
cause of weakening profitability in segments of that 
industry. ■ 


