The Beige Book 
Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions 
By Federal Reserve District 
For use at 2:00 PM EST 
Wednesday 
March 6, 2019 
February 2019 

Federal Reserve Districts 
Boston 
New York 
Philadelphia 
Cleveland 
Chicago 
Richmond 
Atlanta 
St. Louis 
Kansas City 
Dallas 
Minneapolis 
San Francisco 
The System serves commonwealths and territories as follows: the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  
Islands; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Alaska and Hawaii  
are part of the 
 San Francisco District. 

 
National Summary  
    1 
 
 
Boston 
 
 
A-1 
First District 
 
New York 
 
 
B-1 
Second District  
 
Philadelphia  
 
C-1 
Third District  
 
Cleveland 
 
 
D-1 
Fourth District  
 
Richmond 
 
 
E-1 
Fifth District  
 
Atlanta 
 
 
F-1 
Sixth District  
 
Chicago 
 
 
G-1 
Seventh District  
 
St. Louis 
 
 
H-1 
Eighth District  
 
Minneapolis  
 
I-1 
Ninth District  
 
Kansas City  
 
J-1 
Tenth District 
 
Dallas 
 
 
K-1 
Eleventh District 
 
San Francisco 
 
L-1 
Twelfth District 
What is The Beige Book? 
The Beige Book is a Federal Reserve System publication about current 
economic conditions across the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. It charac-
terizes regional economic conditions and prospects based on a variety 
of mostly qualitative information, gathered directly from District 
sources.  
The qualitative nature of the Beige Book creates an opportunity to 
characterize dynamics and identify emerging trends in the economy 
that may not be readily apparent in the available economic data. Be-
cause this information is collected from a wide range of business and 
community contacts through a variety of formal and informal methods, 
the Beige Book can complement other forms of regional information 
gathering.  
How is the information collected? 
Each Federal Reserve Bank gathers anecdotal information on current 
economic conditions in its District through reports from Bank and 
Branch directors, plus phone and in-person interviews with and online 
questionnaires completed by businesses, community contacts, econo-
mists, market experts, and other sources.  
How is the information used? 
The anecdotal information collected in the Beige Book supplements the 
data and analysis used by Federal Reserve economists and staff to 
assess economic conditions in the Federal Reserve Districts. This 
information enables comparison of economic conditions in different 
parts of the country, which can be helpful for assessing the outlook for 
the national economy. The Beige Book also serves as a regular sum-
mary of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to listen to businesses 
and community organizations. 
This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
based on information collected on or before February 25, 2019. This 
document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the 
Federal Reserve System and is not a commentary on the views of 
Federal Reserve officials. 


1 
National Summary 
Highlights by Federal Reserve District 
Overall Economic Activity 
Economic activity continued to expand in late January and February, with ten Districts reporting slight-to-moderate 
growth, and Philadelphia and St. Louis reporting flat economic conditions. About half of the Districts noted that the 
government shutdown had led to slower economic activity in some sectors including retail, auto sales, tourism, real 
estate, restaurants, manufacturing, and staffing services. Consumer spending activity was mixed across the country, 
with contacts from several Districts attributing lower retail and auto sales to harsh winter weather and to higher costs of 
credit. Manufacturing activity strengthened on balance, but numerous manufacturing contacts conveyed concerns 
about weakening global demand, higher costs due to tariffs, and ongoing trade policy uncertainty. Activity in the nonfi-
nancial services sector increased at a modest-to-moderate pace in most Districts, driven in part by growth in the pro-
fessional, scientific, and technical services sub-sector. Residential construction activity was steady or slightly higher 
across most of the U.S., but residential home sales were generally lower. Several real estate contacts noted that inven-
tories had risen slightly but remained historically low, while home prices continued to appreciate but at a slightly slower 
pace. Agricultural conditions remained weak, and energy activity was mixed across Districts.      
Employment and Wages 
Employment increased in most Districts, with modest-to-moderate gains in a majority of Districts and steady to slightly 
higher employment in the rest. Labor markets remained tight for all skill levels, including notable worker shortages for 
positions relating to information technology, manufacturing, trucking, restaurants, and construction. Contacts reported 
labor shortages were restricting employment growth in some areas. Contacts in the higher education sector from the 
St. Louis District indicated falling enrollment as potential students were increasingly choosing to enter the labor market. 
Wages continued to increase for both low- and high-skilled positions across the nation, and a majority of Districts re-
ported moderately higher wages. In addition, contacts in about half of the Districts noted rising non-wage forms of 
employee compensation, including bonuses, relocation assistance, vacation time, and flexible work arrangements.       
Prices 
Prices continued to increase at a modest-to-moderate pace, with several Districts noting faster growth for input prices 
than selling prices. The ability to pass on higher input costs to consumers varied by region and industry, and a few 
Districts noted that demand and the level of industry competition played a role in this variance. A few Districts contin-
ued to report upward price pressures from tariffs on certain goods and services. However, several Districts noted that 
the price of steel, which has been impacted by tariffs, had stabilized or fallen recently. In addition, energy costs, includ-
ing fuel, declined in some areas. Agriculture commodity prices were mixed, though soybeans and dairy prices were 
notably weak.       
Boston 
Retailers and the restaurant industry reported continued 
growth in sales. Most manufacturers cited sales increas-
es, but some said sales were down from a year earlier. 
Staffing firms also reported revenue declines, which they 
attributed to tight labor markets. Some retailers reported 
price increases. Aside from manufacturers, outlooks 
remained positive.  
 
New York 
Regional economic activity increased slightly in the latest 
reporting period, while labor markets remained tight and 
wage growth picked up further. Input costs rose at a 
steady pace, while selling prices accelerated slightly. 
Consumer spending weakened, while housing markets 
were steady to slightly softer. Most sectors saw modest 
growth in activity. Banks reported weaker loan demand 
and a modest pickup in delinquency rates.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

2 
National Summary 
Philadelphia 
On balance, growth of aggregate Third District business 
activity appeared to pause during the current Beige Book 
period. Most sectors showed little or no change from the 
prior period. Lack of qualified labor continued to con-
strain hiring and raise wage pressures, while price in-
creases remained modest. Nevertheless, the firms re-
mained generally positive about the six-month outlook.  
Cleveland 
The District economy grew at a modest pace, with ser-
vices driving much of that growth. Seasonal factors tem-
porarily weighed on growth in construction and freight. 
Employment increased modestly in many sectors. Wag-
es grew moderately across the board. Selling prices rose 
moderately, as companies passed through cost increas-
es to their customers. A drop in mortgage rates spurred 
slight improvement in home sales.  
Richmond 
On balance, the regional economy expanded at a mod-
est pace. Port activity, trucking, and tourism were gener-
ally increasing at a moderate to robust rate. Labor de-
mand strengthened moderately, overall. Manufacturers, 
retailers, and nonfinancial services firms gave mixed ac-
counts. Some retail and professional business services 
in and around D.C. cited delays and lost activity due to 
the partial federal government shutdown.  
Atlanta 
Economic activity moderately expanded. The District’s 
labor market remained tight and wages increased, on 
average. Nonlabor input costs continued to rise. Retail 
sales were flat, and tourism was robust. Home sales 
continued to slow, and commercial real estate was 
steady. Manufacturers noted that new orders were flat, 
but production and inventories increased. Bankers noted 
steady activity.  
Chicago 
Economic activity increased slightly on balance. Em-
ployment and business spending increased slightly; 
manufacturing and construction and real estate activity 
were little changed; and consumer spending fell modest-
ly. Wages rose modestly, prices rose slightly, and finan-
cial conditions improved modestly. Contacts expected 
crop incomes to be lower in 2019 than in 2018.  
 
 
 
 
St. Louis 
Economic activity was unchanged from the previous 
report. Manufacturing activity continued to improve at a 
moderate pace. District bankers reported a slight de-
crease in loan volumes in the first quarter. Residential 
real estate contacts reported that recent sales have 
fallen below expectations. Local farmers expressed 
concerns regarding the near-term status of the industry.   
Minneapolis 
Ninth District economic activity grew modestly. Labor 
demand remained healthy, but signs of weakness sur-
faced. Price and wage pressures were moderate. Con-
sumer spending offered mixed signals on economic 
activity. Manufacturing, energy, and mining activity grew, 
but agricultural financial conditions continued to deterio-
rate and no change was expected in the coming months.  
Kansas City 
Economic activity expanded slightly, and additional gains 
were expected in the months ahead. Consumer spend-
ing increased slightly, with gains in retail, restaurant, 
auto and tourism sales. Manufacturing, wholesale trade, 
transportation, and professional and high-tech firms also 
reported rising activity. However, residential real estate 
activity fell modestly, and agricultural conditions re-
mained weak.  
Dallas 
Economic activity expanded moderately, with a slight 
pickup in demand seen across the manufacturing, ser-
vices, and housing sectors. Drilling activity dipped. Hiring 
continued at a moderate pace, and employment outlooks 
were bullish. Input price pressures moderated but wage 
pressures remained elevated. Outlooks were more opti-
mistic than the previous report.  
San Francisco 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to 
expand at a moderate pace. Labor market conditions 
remained tight, and price inflation was unchanged. Sales 
of retail goods expanded modestly, and activity in the 
consumer and business services sectors was strong. 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened 
moderately. Activity in real estate markets expanded 
moderately on balance. Overall lending activity was flat.  

A-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Reports from business contacts in the First District indicate that activity was somewhat mixed since the last report. 
Retailers reported moderate increases in sales, and restaurant sales were also up. Manufacturers’ results, by contrast, 
were varied, with half of this round’s respondents citing declines in sales or revenue or a marked slowdown in the pace 
of growth. Staffing firms also reported revenue declines, largely attributable to a shortfall of candidates in the current 
tight labor market. Commercial real estate markets were similar or slightly improved since the last report. Residential 
real estate markets in most areas saw declines in closed sales and increases in median sales prices. Manufacturers 
said they were cautious about 2019; other contacts’ outlooks remained mostly positive.  
Employment and Wages  
Business contacts said that labor markets remained tight 
but wage pressures continued to be moderate. Beyond a 
shortage of workers in certain skill categories, such as 
information technology, retail respondents reported no 
real problems filling job openings. Depending on local 
labor market conditions, some retailers reported seeing 
higher wage costs. The restaurant industry complained 
of severe labor shortages. Hiring by manufacturers was 
mixed. A furniture maker laid off 10 workers in January. 
A semiconductor manufacturer facing big declines in 
demand from China put a hiring freeze in place, but they 
were reluctant to institute layoffs since it takes three to 
six months to train new workers. Three-quarters of man-
ufacturing contacts reported continuing to hire at their 
normal pace; none cited unusual wage pressure. Staffing 
firms reported tight labor markets and some increases in 
bill and pay rates (that is, wages). 
Prices  
Pricing reports were mixed. Retailers said price declines 
for certain food categories have slowed down and some 
grocery categories saw price increases. A prominent big-
box retailer reported that some consumer goods manu-
facturers announced plans to raise prices by 7 percent to 
10 percent, though when these cost increases pass 
through to retail prices depends on when contracts with 
individual retail chains are renewed. Manufacturing 
contacts reported no unusual pricing pressures.  
Retail and Tourism 
Retailers contacted for this round reported that on a year
-over-year basis, comparable-store sales were up by mid
-single-digit percentages. Capital spending plans for 
2019 are a bit higher than 2018. One contact observed 
that consumers seem willing to spend on all categories 
of goods, “whether a $10 T-shirt or a $2,000 television 
set.” Moderate but positive growth is expected for the 
rest of this year, though there is some lingering worry 
that higher tariffs, if implemented, could put a damper on 
sales of affected products.  
A contact in the Massachusetts restaurant industry re-
ported that based on meal tax receipts, restaurant sales 
were up 5.4 percent year-over-year in January. Howev-
er, these overall results were largely driven by new en-
trants, as established locations reported sales ranging 
from flat to down or up 1 percent. Such lackluster perfor-
mance, higher operating costs, acute labor shortages, 
and higher labor costs (in part attributable to scheduled 
increases in the minimum wage for tipped workers) have 
prompted recent restaurant closings by some experi-
enced and high-profile operators. Given the greater 
competition from the proliferation of restaurants, opera-
tors are reluctant to raise menu prices to cover their 
higher costs. Despite the threat of more closings, aggre-
gate expectations for the Massachusetts restaurant 
industry in 2019 are positive. 
 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

A-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston   
Manufacturing and Related Services  
The news from manufacturers was mixed. Of eight re-
sponding firms, two reported substantial drops in sales 
and two reported significant weakness. The two firms 
that reported serious issues were a semiconductor man-
ufacturer and a furniture builder. The furniture firm 
makes its products in factories in New England; they 
reported sales in January were down 30 percent versus 
the same period a year earlier; but better results over 
President’s Day weekend reduced concern. The semi-
conductor firm sells mostly to the auto industry and said 
that a 40 percent drop in new orders from China was the 
biggest fall in sales since the collapse of Lehman in 
2008. Two other firms, both with heavy exposure to 
semiconductors, said that the market had slowed signifi-
cantly since earlier in 2018. Four other contacts reported 
good overall sales. 
Capital expenditures were down for several contacts and 
unchanged for others. One said that they had 
“mothballed” plans for a major expansion of a semicon-
ductor wafer plant; another said they might delay con-
struction of a new plant due to start this summer.  
Most manufacturing contacts expressed caution about 
2019. The ones facing the most severe declines were 
waiting to see if the weakness was transitory, while 
others said they were very uncertain. The slowdown in 
China, whether or not the result of trade issues, cast a 
shadow over the manufacturing sector. 
Staffing Services  
New England staffing firms reported negative single-digit 
revenue growth for the year 2018. Regardless of industry 
and placement type, all respondents cited low unemploy-
ment rates and limited applicant supply as challenges to 
their business, and remarked on the healthy number of 
job requests from clients. A few staffing firms said the 
tight labor market made it possible to raise rates, with no 
push-back from clients. Most firms reported ongoing 
work to strengthen relationships with community groups 
and advertise for candidates on social media channels. 
The partial government shutdown reportedly created 
uncertainty among client organizations, who were less 
willing to make hiring decisions near the end of 2018. 
Under tight labor market conditions and with a limited 
talent pool, respondents expressed mixed views on the 
outlook, but a majority were optimistic. 
Commercial Real Estate 
Commercial real estate fundamentals in the First District 
were either flat or up slightly in recent weeks, depending 
on the location and property type. Office leasing activity 
remained strong in both Boston and Portland, with ask-
ing rents continuing to rise in the former and holding 
steady in the latter. Office leasing was described as 
stable at a modest pace in Providence and slow (but 
also stable) in Hartford. In Providence, office rents were 
up 2 percent to 4 percent from one year ago; in Hartford, 
rents have been flat for an extended period. Industrial 
leasing demand was robust in most of the First District, 
although low inventories held back activity in Rhode 
Island. Contacts in Providence and Hartford perceived 
that investors were increasingly seeking to purchase 
properties in smaller cities in order to obtain higher yields 
than in Boston, but hard numbers on transactions vol-
ume were not available.  
Planned construction of speculative office space tailored 
to the life sciences industry increased in the Boston 
area. Commercial real estate lenders were reported to 
be offering increasingly narrow interest rate spreads and 
generous loan terms. Construction costs continued to 
rise on average, and one Boston contact saw steep 
increases in subcontracting costs from a year ago that 
were attributed to scarce labor in the skilled trades.  
Most contacts maintained a positive outlook. However, 
some expect economic growth—and hence demand for 
commercial real estate—to slow in 2019.     
Residential Real Estate 
Heading into 2019, residential real estate markets in the 
First District experienced a slowdown in sales. Sales 
decreased or stayed flat in all reporting areas for both 
single family homes and condos. (Most areas reported 
year-over-year changes from December 2017 to Decem-
ber 2018, while New Hampshire reported statistics 
through January 2019.) Contacts cited interest rate 
hikes, appreciating prices, and the recent partial govern-
ment shut down as possible reasons for lower sales. 
For single family homes, median sales prices increased 
in all reporting areas but Massachusetts. Inventory 
dropped in all areas except Rhode Island. For condos, 
prices declined in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and 
New Hampshire, stayed flat in Boston, and increased 
slightly in Maine. Condo inventory increased in most 
areas, while New Hampshire saw a moderate drop. 
Vermont data refer to single family homes and condos 
combined; the median sales price increased, while in-
ventories declined. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.bostonfed.org/regional-economy  

B-1
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Second District has increased slightly since the last report. The labor market has remained 
tight, and wage growth has picked up further—mainly in lower wage industries. Businesses noted continued widespread 
cost pressures and increasingly widespread hikes in selling prices. Manufacturing activity expanded slightly, while busi-
ness picked up in a number of service industries. Consumer spending has been weaker, on balance, and tourism has 
been mixed. Housing markets have been stable to slightly softer, while commercial real estate markets have remained 
steady overall. Finally, banks reported steady to weaker loan demand and a modest upturn in delinquency rates.  
Employment and Wages  
The labor market has remained tight across the District, 
with employers reporting ongoing difficulties in filling job 
openings, particularly for skilled trades and technical 
fields. Businesses generally reported that employment 
was flat to up slightly, on balance, since the beginning of 
the year. Firms in the wholesale, finance, and education 
& health sectors reported modest net hiring, while con-
tacts in the manufacturing, transportation, professional & 
business services, and real estate & construction sectors 
indicated that employment was essentially flat. Contacts 
in the retail and information industries noted modest net 
declines in staffing levels. 
Wages have picked up further, particularly in the lower-
wage retail and leisure & hospitality industries. A number 
of business contacts in New York State’s manufacturing, 
retail, and leisure & hospitality sectors indicated that the 
year-end hike in the minimum wage was affecting their 
employment and compensation decisions.      
Prices  
Businesses reported ongoing widespread escalation in 
input prices and increasingly widespread hikes in selling 
prices in the latest reporting period. Input price 
pressures tended to be most widespread in trans-
portation and wholesale & retail trade sectors. Contacts 
across most industry sectors reported steady to moder-
ately rising selling prices, with the most widespread rises 
reported from wholesalers. Contacts in the real estate 
and education & health sectors reported that selling 
prices were flat overall.  
Retailers generally indicated that selling prices were up 
modestly in early 2019, though one major chain reported 
more discounting than usual to clear out excess holiday-
season inventories. Nightly rates for New York City hotel 
rooms were little changed from a year earlier, and aver-
age ticket prices for Broadway shows continued to slip 
further and were down 5-6 percent from a year earlier.  
Consumer Spending 
Retail sales were mixed but sluggish, on balance. A 
major retail chain noted that sales were well below plan 
in January and down from a year earlier before rebound-
ing modestly in early February; the weakness was partly 
attributed to adverse weather and the government shut-
down. Reports from retailers in upstate New York were 
more upbeat, characterizing sales activity as solid. In-
ventories, which were a bit leaner than usual going into 
the holiday season, were generally said to be in good 
shape as of mid-February.     
New vehicle sales have weakened in early 2019, accord-
ing to dealers in upstate New York, falling well below 
early-2018 levels. Some of this weakness was attributed 
to harsh winter weather. New vehicle inventories re-
The Beige Book ■ February 2019

B-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York   
mained somewhat high, on balance. Sales of used vehi-
cles were mixed but, on balance, steady. Dealers indi-
cated that credit conditions remained in good shape. 
Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic states (NY, 
NJ, PA), which had climbed to a cyclical high in Novem-
ber, retreated in December and edged down further in 
January, based on the Conference Board’s monthly 
survey.  
Manufacturing and Distribution 
The manufacturing and distribution sectors picked up 
somewhat in the latest reporting period. Manufacturers 
noted a modest pickup in growth, while wholesale distrib-
utors and transportation firms reported solid gains, fol-
lowing weak reports at the end of 2018.  
Looking ahead, contacts in the manufacturing and 
wholesale trade sectors have regained a fairly high level 
of optimism, but those in the transportation sector have 
remained more circumspect. A number of contacts con-
tinued to express concern about tariffs and trade re-
strictions, as well as New York State’s minimum wage 
hikes.       
Services 
Overall, business has been mixed but, on balance, up 
modestly in the latest reporting period. Contacts in the 
information and health & education sectors reported flat 
activity in early 2019, while businesses in professional & 
business services noted some pickup in activity. 
Leisure & hospitality businesses reported steady, moder-
ate growth. Tourism was mixed in New York City, follow-
ing a brisk holiday season. A local tourism-sector expert 
indicated that hotel occupancy rates, though still fairly 
elevated, slipped below year-ago levels. However, 
Broadway theaters continued to report strong year-over-
year gains in revenues and especially attendance, which 
was up nearly 20 percent from a year earlier in both 
January and early February.          
Real Estate and Construction 
Housing markets across the District have been stable to 
somewhat softer since the last report. Homes sales in 
upstate New York have slowed further, though the inven-
tory of homes on the market has remained low, and 
prices have continued to rise. In New York City, sales of 
existing co-ops and condos have slowed further. Selling 
prices for newly-built condos have weakened further, 
while resale prices on existing apartments have been 
mostly flat to down slightly. The inventory of unsold 
homes has continued to climb but is still fairly low by 
historical standards. Housing markets in the rest of the 
metro area followed a similar pattern. A local housing 
expert noted that potential buyers have been hesitant. At 
the high end of the market, an oversupply and concern 
about the curtailed federal tax deductibility of homeown-
er expenses have weighed on the market.  At the lower 
end, some potential buyers have become more inclined 
to rent than to buy.   
Residential rents across the District have picked up 
somewhat since the last report but remain roughly on par 
with a year earlier. In New York City, the prevalence of 
landlord concessions appears to have receded some-
what and rents have risen modestly, as rental vacancy 
rates have remained low. The recent withdrawal of Ama-
zon’s planned expansion in northwestern Queens has 
reportedly had little effect on the area’s housing market.   
Commercial real estate markets have been mixed but 
little changed overall. Both office availability rates and 
asking rents have remained steady, on balance. Retail 
markets have continued to soften, as vacancies have 
continued to rise. Industrial markets, on the other hand, 
have remained firm: While availability rates have leveled 
off at low levels, rents have continued to climb briskly—
mainly in the New York City metropolitan region.  
New multi-family construction starts remained sluggish, 
though a substantial volume of residential development 
remains under construction—particularly in New York 
City. New office construction starts picked up in New 
York City but remained sluggish elsewhere.  
Banking and Finance 
Small to medium-sized banks in the District reported 
lower demand for consumer loans, residential mortgag-
es, and commercial mortgages, but slightly higher de-
mand for commercial and industrial (C&I) loans. Refi-
nancing activity was reported to be little changed. Banks 
reported higher credit standards for commercial mort-
gages but unchanged standards across other categories. 
Higher loan spreads were reported on residential mort-
gages, while spreads were steady for all other catego-
ries. Finally, banks reported increased delinquency rates 
on consumer and C&I loans but unchanged delinquency 
rates on residential and commercial mortgages. ■  
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/regional-data-
center/index.html 

C-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Summary of Economic Activity 
On balance, growth of aggregate Third District business activity appeared to pause for much of the current Beige Book 
period; however, late reports indicated a resumption of slight growth in some sectors. Significant sectors, including 
manufacturing, nonfinancial services, and nonauto retail sales, slowed from modest growth in the prior period to little or 
no change in the current period. Factors cited for the slowdown included weak global demand and uncertainty because 
of trade wars and the government shutdown. Nevertheless, employment continued to grow at a modest pace, although 
the labor market remained tight and upward wage pressures remained moderate. Price pressures remained modest. 
Despite the apparent pause in growth, firms’ outlook for growth over the next six months remained positive, with two-
thirds of the nonmanufacturing firms and nearly half of the manufacturers anticipating increases in general activity.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment growth continued at a modest pace during 
the current Beige Book period. About one-fourth of the 
firms reported an increase in staff. Manufacturers have 
noted little change in the average hours worked since 
the prior Beige Book period; however, average hours 
appeared to contract a bit among other firms.  
Most contacts continued to note that the labor market 
was very tight and that hiring and retaining workers 
remained difficult. Firms are responding by raising wag-
es, increasing job flexibility, training new hires who have 
fewer skills than desired, and making greater use of trial 
periods of temp agency placements.  
Wage growth continued at a moderate pace, with reports 
of wage and benefit cost increases averaging about 3.0 
percent. The share of nonmanufacturing contacts who 
reported increases in wage and benefit costs edged 
higher to near 40 percent. Contacts noted that recent 
state increases in the minimum wage may cause some 
wage compression, but most firms were already paying 
above the new minimums. A few that were not continue 
to look toward automation.  
 
Prices  
Price increases remained modest for most firms. The 
share of manufacturing firms reporting increases in 
prices paid and prices received averaged around 30 
percent. The share was much lower among nonmanu-
facturing firms. Several contacts noted that food com-
modity prices had remained modest or were better than 
expected.  
Looking ahead six months, the percentage of manufac-
turing firms that expect to pay higher prices for inputs fell 
to 40 percent from 60 percent. Those firms expecting to 
receive higher prices for their own goods fell to 30 per-
cent from near 50 percent.  
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity appeared to decline slightly – a 
reversal of trend from modest growth. The percentage of 
firms that reported increased shipments and new orders 
fell almost to one-fifth, but the percentage reporting 
decreases rose to about one-fourth.  
The makers of chemicals, primary and fabricated metal 
products, and electronic and industrial equipment mostly 
have noted no change in new orders and shipments – 
and occasionally declines – since the prior period. How-
ever, these changes were weaker than those reported 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

C-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia   
for the same period last year. The makers of lumber and 
paper products also reported flat or negative activity, 
changes which were comparable to the prior year.  
Explanations cited for the slowdown included falling 
demand from European and Asian markets, with tariffs 
and Brexit as prime factors. Reduced demand from 
domestic sources was attributed to several factors: a 
pullback in orders following an excessive inventory 
buildup; lower oil prices, which have dampened capital 
expenditures from energy producers; and uncertainty 
during the government shutdown.  
Despite the current period’s pause, manufacturers’ ex-
pectations of general activity six months from now did 
not shift. Moreover, expectations of future shipments 
also held steady. However, expectations of future new 
orders, employment, and capital spending edged lower. 
On balance, expectations for each of these indicators 
were near or above their historic nonrecession averages.  
Consumer Spending 
On balance, nonauto retailers reported slight gains in the 
new year. While some brick-and-mortar retailers contin-
ue to lose market share to online stores, contacts cited 
low unemployment rates, relatively high consumer confi-
dence, and relatively low gas prices as factors contrib-
uting to ongoing gains in current sales and in expected 
sales. However, the government shutdown was costly for 
a few smaller Center City Philadelphia businesses, such 
as coffee shops, that serve federal office buildings and 
national historic areas.  
Auto sales continued to bump along at relatively high 
levels, with little overall change compared with the same 
period last year. Sales reports for January were mixed, 
and some early reports for February noted a decline.  
Tourism activity was off a bit, according to contacts. One 
contact noted an unexpected downtick in activity in the 
Poconos – partially due to poor weather in January. 
Philadelphia hotels were challenged compared with last 
year; the Eagles’ 2019 playoff run included no home 
games, then the government shutdown closed several 
national park attractions, reducing tourism activity in the 
city. An analyst noted concerns with ongoing trade un-
certainty and the strong dollar, which reduces foreign 
tourist visits and average visitor spending.  
Nonfinancial Services 
On balance, service-sector firms grew slightly as mid-
period reports suggested a brief pause in activity. The 
percentage of firms reporting increases in sales and in 
new orders remained nearly the same, while reports of 
declining sales and fewer new orders edged higher on 
average. Expectations of future growth rebounded to   
two-thirds of the firms from half in the prior period.  
Financial Services 
Financial firms continued to report modest growth on a 
year-over-year basis in credit card lending and in overall 
loan volumes (excluding credit cards).  
During the current period (reported without seasonal 
adjustments), volumes grew robustly in commercial and 
industrial lending and in other consumer loans (not else-
where classified). Loans grew modestly in commercial 
real estate and home mortgages; auto loans were flat; 
and home equity lines declined.  
Bankers cited client uncertainty stemming from trade 
policy, the government shutdown, and global outlooks 
but described no concerns with the underlying U.S. 
economy. Lending standards were mostly unchanged, 
with a few banks tightening in specific segments. Con-
tacts also noted no problems with credit quality.  
Real Estate and Construction 
According to homebuilders, contract signings appear to 
have held steady, although excessive rain has hampered 
construction activity. One builder – just returned from a 
national trade conference – reported that after a year-
end slowdown, activity had picked up by February, na-
tionally and locally.  
Existing home sales continued to decline moderately 
across most local markets. Contacts noted no early 
signs that the spring selling season would bring an end 
to the extremely low inventories that have constrained 
sales.  
On balance, commercial real estate construction and 
leasing activity appear to have edged down slightly from 
relatively high levels. However, most contacts remain 
very busy. Consolidations in health care and education 
are fueling new projects for architects and engineers. 
Contacts noted that absorption of new hotel properties 
and high-end multifamily units have largely kept pace 
with construction. The strong market for industrial and 
warehouse space continued for smaller spaces; howev-
er, demand may have eased a bit for warehouses in 
excess of 1 million square feet. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/regional-
economy 

D-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Fourth District grew at a modest pace since our last report. Professional and business services 
saw moderate demand growth. Home sales increased slightly because of a drop in mortgage rates. Retailers noted a 
slight softening in demand after the holiday season, while banking conditions improved modestly after seasonal slow-
ness. Seasonal factors weighed on growth in nonresidential construction and transportation. Manufacturers gave mixed 
reports, as some saw a pickup in demand, while others reported slowness and uncertainty in the global economy 
weighed on growth. Employment in the District increased modestly, with much of the growth coming from nonfinancial 
services and from manufacturing. Wages rose moderately across many sectors and occupations. District companies 
increased their selling prices moderately. Construction companies passed on strong input cost increases. By contrast, 
manufacturers’ prices remained more stable as the input cost pressures they had been facing in prior periods abated. 
Transportation companies raised prices, but retailers did not raise prices to cover transportation cost increases. 
Employment and Wages  
District contacts reported modest increases in staffing 
levels. Construction companies added some office staff 
but, because of the winter weather, did not hire field 
workers. They expect to resume increasing field staff in 
the spring. Manufacturers added both salaried and hour-
ly staff, with one contact stating that her company had 
been hiring more of its temporary staff into full-time 
employment. Staffing companies reported increased 
placements and noted that nursing, information technolo-
gy, and manufacturing staff are particularly in demand. 
Professional and business services firms, especially 
information technology firms, accelerated hiring to meet 
strong demand and expected to continue to add to their 
payrolls in the next few months. Trucking companies 
continued to add drivers when possible, but railroad 
companies downsized their staff. Railroad companies 
expected further staff reductions in the next few months. 
Retailers indicated that staff turnover was higher than 
usual in the beginning of the year and that they were 
hiring to maintain staff levels. Still, nondurable goods 
retailers continued to increase wages in line with infla-
tion. Retailers planned to hold staff levels steady in the 
next few months.  
 
Wages in the District rose at a moderate pace that was 
similar to that of the previous survey round. Wage 
growth was broad-based, as wages rose for a wide 
range of industries and occupations. Bankers raised 
wages both for low-wage and for high-wage positions, 
citing competitive labor markets. A couple of construction 
companies granted large retention-focused merit in-
creases to office staff, but other companies mentioned 
that they tended to grant raises during busier seasons. 
Manufacturers re-evaluated wage rates for blue-collar 
laborers, and many manufacturers increased pay be-
yond the rate of inflation. Auto dealers also noted that 
pay for qualified technicians rose. Trucking companies 
continued to compete on wages, noting that demand for 
drivers exceeded supply. Some retailers felt pressure 
from local minimum wage increases. Staffing firms also 
noted upward wage pressures. One firm stated that new 
hires have been pressuring the firm to increase its start-
ing wages; another stated that it now offers raises every 
6 months instead of every 18 months, as it did previous-
ly. The rate of hiring by professional and business ser-
vices firms accelerated somewhat. Nevertheless, wage 
increases in the industry decelerated, with a number of 
firms stating that wages were already high. 
 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

D-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland   
Prices  
Selling prices rose moderately, with many businesses 
reporting that they were keeping up with input cost infla-
tion. Upward cost pressures were strong for construction 
firms, which reported higher concrete prices. Nonresi-
dential builders, and to a lesser extent homebuilders, 
raised their selling prices to maintain their margins. 
Upward cost pressures in manufacturing eased, as a 
number of producers reported stable or even lower steel 
prices after the tariff-driven steel price escalation in 
2018. Because manufacturers did not see the same cost 
pressures as construction firms, they did not raise their 
prices to the same extent. Some producers actually cut 
their prices because of the lower steel prices. Retailers 
cited tariffs and higher transportation prices as elevating 
their costs. Yet, the majority of retailers held their prices 
steady, while auto dealers and producers gave fewer 
new-vehicle incentives. Transportation contacts reported 
elevated input costs as higher maintenance, repair, and 
other services costs outweighed savings from stable or 
lower fuel prices. However, pricing power was strong for 
transportation firms. The majority of freight contacts were 
able to raise their fees thanks to continued strong de-
mand for their services. 
Consumer Spending 
Retailers reported slightly softer demand following the 
strong holiday season. By contrast, contacts had indicat-
ed in the prior survey round that they had expected solid 
growth through the first quarter of 2019. One auto retail-
er noted that sales of new vehicles had decreased slight-
ly because of higher prices, while the demand for used 
vehicles increased. Retailers expect demand growth 
going into the second quarter of 2019 to be the same or 
better than in 2018. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturers in the District gave mixed reports. Many 
contacts reported that activity picked up during the last 
two months as a result of the usual seasonal build up 
and that they expect growth to continue. However, oth-
ers expressed concerns about a number of factors that 
dragged down demand and weighed on the outlook for 
future growth. These include 1) supply chain constraints 
that have affected the availability of intermediate goods 
and components, 2) slower global growth—particularly in 
Europe and China—that contributed to a slowing in 
orders, 3) continued uncertainty about the future of tariffs 
on steel and aluminum and ongoing US–China trade 
negotiations, and 4) decreased consumer confidence. In 
addition to the ongoing trade negotiations between Chi-
na and the United States, one manufacturer noted that if 
Chinese policymakers choose to stimulate heavy indus-
try in their country, the outlook for his organization would 
be better than it would be absent intervention in the 
Chinese market.  
Real Estate and Construction 
Demand for residential real estate and construction 
improved slightly, as lower mortgage rates spurred home 
sales. Homebuilders and real estate agents expressed 
optimism that conditions will improve in the next few 
months, though they attributed this expectation primarily 
to warmer weather. Real estate agents reported that 
homeownership, relative to renting, rose in the region. 
Nonresidential construction remained steady, as nega-
tive seasonal effects countered underlying demand 
growth. Nonresidential builders noted that they believed 
normal seasonal variation caused the pause in demand 
growth, and they expected growth to resume once winter 
ends. Nonresidential builders’ backlogs increased, as the 
stable and strong demand outpaced their ability to work 
through it during the winter. Builders acquired more 
public projects than private work.  
Financial Services 
Banking conditions recovered after a seasonal slow-
down. Though some seasonal softness remained on the 
consumer side, this was offset by strength in commercial 
and industrial lending. Consumer demand for credit 
declined as consumers used the first quarter to pay off 
credit card balances following the holiday season. Re-
ports about mortgage and auto lending were mixed. 
Some bankers indicated they felt the housing market 
was slowing, while others expected a seasonal upswing 
in mortgage demand. Commercial demand was concen-
trated among large and middle-market firms for mergers 
and acquisitions and some CRE projects, though one 
banker noted that “precautionary demand for cash and 
liquidity” had increased from commercial customers. 
 
Nonfinancial Services 
Professional and business services firms reported mod-
erate demand and growth. A contact at a design firm 
noted that previously postponed projects were coming to 
fruition because consumer confidence improved. These 
firms expected sales and growth to be strong over the 
next few months. Freight contacts reported demand was 
flat because of extreme weather in the Midwest and 
Northeast. These contacts expect shipping volumes to 
be stable in the coming months. The majority of nonfi-
nancial services firms expected to modestly increase 
their prices charged over the course of 2019. ■ 
 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.clevelandfed.org/region/ 

E-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Fifth District economy continued to grow at a modest pace in recent weeks. Port activity remained robust; however, 
some contacts expressed concern that trade policy could negatively affect volumes in the next several months. Mean-
while, trucking demand growth slowed to a moderate pace. Manufacturing activity was mixed, and firms continued to 
report uncertainties and higher materials costs associated with tariffs and trade. Travel and tourism rose moderately, 
overall. However, a sharp decline in tourism was reported by several firms in and around the District of Columbia, which 
was attributed to the partial federal government shutdown. Retailers gave mixed reports; some with lower sales citied 
poor weather or the shutdown. Several nonfinancial services firms also reported project delays and lost revenue due to 
the shutdown, but other businesses saw increased demand for their services. Residential and commercial real estate 
sales and leasing rose modestly, on balance. Banks reported modest growth in loan volumes. Labor demand strength-
ened moderately, wages rose modestly, and many firms reported using non-wage benefits to attract and retain talent. 
Price growth remained moderate, overall.  
Employment and Wages  
The demand for labor strengthened moderately in recent 
weeks. Staffing firms reported that the volume of worker 
conversion from temporary to permanent increased 
modestly. Meanwhile, employers continued to report 
very tight labor markets and difficulties finding qualified 
workers, particularly hourly workers. Additionally, firms 
reported high demand for construction workers, execu-
tive assistants, HR professionals, engineers, IT profes-
sionals, accounting and finance professionals, plant 
production workers, mechanics, and truckers. Wage 
increases remained modest, overall. Meanwhile, many 
firms reported offering bonuses or relocation assistance 
to attract and retain talent.   
Prices  
Price growth remained moderate, overall, since our 
previous Beige Book report. Manufacturing prices re-
ceived continued to increase at a moderate rate. Also, 
input price growth slowed slightly but still outpaced 
growth in selling prices. Manufacturers noted some price 
declines for energy, petrochemicals, corrugated boxes, 
and transportation costs, although several firms contin-
ued to report paying higher prices for tariffed raw materi-
als, such as steel and aluminum. Services sector firms 
indicated that prices paid rose at a slightly faster rate 
than selling prices, but both remained moderate, overall.  
Manufacturing 
Fifth District manufacturing activity was mixed in recent 
weeks. Several firms, including a Virginia furniture manu-
facturer, continued to struggle to deal with uncertainty 
surrounding tariff-related cost increases. In addition, a 
cabinet manufacturer reported strong demand and was 
able to pass through part of the materials cost increase 
that resulted from the tariffs. Many firms, such as a Mar-
yland concrete company, attributed a decline in business 
to intemperate weather. Food manufacturers in Maryland 
and Virginia reported robust growth despite a drop in 
sales to D.C. area restaurants during the partial govern-
ment shutdown.   
Ports and Transportation 
Ports in the Fifth District saw robust activity in recent 
weeks. Growth in imports was particularly strong and 
continued to surpass growth in exports. Ports invested in 
capital expansion to allow for continued growth but re-
mained concerned about how business in the next sev-
eral months might be affected by trade policy. One port 
executive saw business bounce back after weakness at 
the end of 2018. Another source reported record busi-
ness to start the year but expected it to slow in the near 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

E-2
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  
future. In addition, an airport saw continued growth in 
both passenger traffic and cargo. 
Trucking companies saw demand growth slow to a 
moderate pace. A North Carolina firm attributed some of 
the slowing to inclement weather but was cutting back 
on hiring in anticipation of a slower year. In addition, a 
Virginia firm saw a softening in retail shipments. A com-
pany in the District of Columbia reported trimming dis-
cretionary spending as business was expected to slow 
down. Concerns about a decline in the pace of trade 
growth in the coming year were also expressed.   
Retail, Travel, and Tourism 
Travel and tourism in the Fifth District picked up moder-
ately since our last report. A Virginia resort saw strong 
business, and an executive at a West Virginia hotel 
reported that warming weather was helping business. In 
Charleston, South Carolina, tourism remained steady 
despite the temporary closure of Fort Sumter during the 
partial government shutdown. Meanwhile, the Washing-
ton, D.C., area saw a sharp drop in visitors during the 
shutdown and a hotel in Asheville, North Carolina, re-
ported lower occupancy. 
Fifth District retailers reported mixed conditions in recent 
weeks. Many retailers saw a drop in business, which 
resulted from bad weather, while others struggled with 
continued cost increases due, in part, to tariffs. A West 
Virginia auto dealer attributed a sharp decline in sales to 
the government shutdown leaving potential customers 
without pay; however, a Virginia dealer reported solid 
business. Meanwhile, a South Carolina retailer invested 
in new storage to allow for sales growth, and a West 
Virginia sporting goods retailer reported steady demand. 
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate contacts indicated modest 
growth, overall. Home sales rose modestly in recent 
weeks and buyer traffic was reportedly steady, despite 
winter storms hitting some areas in the District. Brokers 
reported that inventories generally remained at low 
levels. Agents continued to report that lower- to middle-
priced homes were absorbed quickly and, in some cas-
es, received multiple offers. District home prices in-
creased slightly, although agents reported slower price 
growth in homes priced above $800,000. Residential 
construction was steady in most markets; however, with 
limited speculative homebuilding.  
Commercial real estate leasing rose modestly in recent 
weeks. District brokers reported increased demand for 
restaurant, grocery, and industrial space, while retail 
activity was stable to increasing. Moreover, vacancy 
rates decreased slightly across all sub-markets, and 
contacts reported that limited inventory pushed rental 
rates up slightly in some areas. On the commercial sales 
side, brokers reported modest increases in prices and 
volumes. Multi-family leasing remained healthy, although 
reports on construction activity varied across the District.  
Banking and Finance 
On the whole, loan volumes increased modestly since 
our previous report. Residential mortgage demand was 
generally described as stable to increasing modestly, 
and bankers reported that deposits were up moderately. 
Commercial real estate loan demand remained strong. 
Other business loan demand increased slightly, on bal-
ance, while automotive lending was reportedly flat. Loan 
and deposit interest rates edged higher while credit 
quality and credit standards remained strong, overall.    
Nonfinancial Services 
Reports from nonfinancial services firms were mixed in 
recent weeks. Demand increased for some engineering 
consultants, law firms, advertising agencies, hospitals, 
and IT businesses. Meanwhile, several firms noted a 
decrease in demand, including those engaged in tele-
communications, security services, and federal govern-
ment contractors. Overall, firms indicated that the partial 
government shutdown resulted in lost revenue, job cuts, 
and project delays due to lapses in grant and permit 
approvals. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy 

F-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Sixth District business contacts reported that economic activity continued to advance at a moderate pace over the re-
porting period and the outlook among contacts remained positive. Labor markets continued to tighten, and some firms 
noted relocating certain segments of their operations to gain access to larger pools of talent. On balance, firms noted 
growth in wages since the previous report, along with mounting pressure in a number of hard-to-fill positions. Nonlabor 
costs continued to rise, particularly for those goods and services impacted by tariffs. Retail sales growth was flat over 
the reporting period, and vehicle sales were slow. Reports from the hospitality sector were upbeat, with solid growth in 
business and leisure travel over year earlier levels. The slowdown in residential real estate activity noted in the last 
report continued, and commercial real estate activity remained steady. Manufacturers reported that new orders were 
flat; however, production levels increased. Banking contacts indicated that conditions remained stable. 
Employment and Wages  
Business contacts continued to cite challenges finding 
and retaining workers, particularly in information technol-
ogy, construction, food services, medical, finance, manu-
facturing, and transportation. In response to these chal-
lenges, some firms shared that they were considering or 
had already taken steps to relocate portions of their 
business, mainly information technology, finance and 
accounting, customer service, and upper management 
positions, to larger urban locations with greater access to 
talent. Several contacts continued to report that their 
inability to find workers hindered their firm’s ability to 
grow and meet rising demand. Consequently, many cited 
a renewed focus on productivity enhancements using 
existing and/or new technology and automated systems.    
On average, firms across the District reported wage 
increases from 2½ to 4 percent. Increases were greater 
and pressure was described as more acute in urban 
areas and/or among hard-to-fill positions, including jobs 
in nursing and other medical fields, engineering, manu-
facturing, retail, hospitality, and banking and finance. 
Similar to previous reports, many contacts shared that 
even after increasing wages, they struggled to attract 
enough qualified candidates, and thus indicated expand-
ing non-wage offerings, such as additional vacation time, 
flexible work arrangements, and/or reduced hours for full
-time, exempt employees.          
Prices  
Increases in some nonlabor input costs continued to be 
reported by business contacts. Rising costs were pre-
dominately noted in goods and services impacted by 
tariffs, as well as in transportation and construction. The 
Atlanta Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey 
showed year-over-year unit costs were up 1.9 percent in 
February. Survey respondents indicated they expect unit 
costs to rise 1.9 percent over the next twelve months.  
Consumer Spending and Tourism 
District retailers reported flat sales growth since the 
previous report. Automotive dealers reported a slow start 
to 2019. Retail and automotive contacts expect modest 
sales growth, on a year-over-year basis, for 2019. 
On balance, travel and tourism contacts reported a 
strong start to 2019 with solid growth in business and 
leisure travel compared to the same time period last 
year. The outlook for activity remains positive with 
healthy advance bookings reported through the first 
quarter of this year.    
Construction and Real Estate 
Although affordability remains a challenge for the hous-
ing sector, the recent moderation in interest rates allevi-
ated some pressure and led to increasing optimism 
among sellers and homebuilders as they head into the 
peak selling season. Existing home sales in 2018 were 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

F-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta   
flat or down in many markets throughout the District 
compared to the previous year. Inventory levels, though 
increasing on a year-over-year basis, remained low in 
most markets. Home price appreciation moderated in 
many markets as declining sales and rising inventory 
levels led to less upward pressure on prices.  
Commercial real estate leasing and sales activity re-
mained steady across most District markets. Overall, 
rents grew and vacancies trended downward at a mod-
est pace. Strength remained in the industrial, multifamily, 
and medical sectors. Office market contacts reported 
overall persistent strength; however, higher levels of 
employee densification and greater deliveries of space 
appeared to be creating pockets of slowing in some local 
markets.   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing contacts described overall business con-
ditions as relatively healthy during the reporting period. 
While new order levels were somewhat flat, production 
levels were reported to have increased, along with a 
small rise in finished inventories. Purchasing managers 
reported no significant change in wait times for supply 
deliveries. Expectations for future production levels 
remained strong, with over one-half of contacts expect-
ing higher production over the next six months.  
Transportation 
District transportation firms cited mixed results since the 
previous report. Railroad contacts noted that total rail 
traffic was up modestly compared with year-earlier lev-
els; however, intermodal shipments declined slightly. 
Port contacts cited substantial increases in container 
traffic, bulk and break bulk cargo, and autos. Trucking 
activity slowed since the previous report, in line with 
expectations. Most transportation contacts in the District 
expect higher demand in 2019.   
Banking and Finance  
Financial institutions remained healthy due in part to 
sustained earnings growth and a relatively benign credit 
environment. Increasing interest rates had a positive 
impact on earnings though funding costs put some pres-
sure on net interest margins for a number of institutions. 
Loan growth was stable even as overall asset growth 
slowed due to a declining securities portfolio. Overall, 
credit quality metrics remained positive with charge-offs 
and nonaccrual loans still near historical lows.    
Energy  
New discoveries in the Gulf of Mexico contributed to 
increased activity in offshore exploration and production. 
Exports of crude continued to accelerate. Pipeline con-
struction and operations remained strong across the 
District, particularly among firms planning to export crude 
from Louisiana ports. Chemical and petrochemical indus-
try contacts reported steady activity and slightly higher 
levels of capacity utilization over the previous reporting 
period. While some new refinery and chemical projects 
were announced, many contacts indicated that activity 
was in a lull during the first quarter and was expected to 
pick up later in the year. From the utilities perspective, 
cold weather created a surge of demand among residen-
tial and commercial customers.  
Agriculture 
Agricultural conditions across the District were mixed. 
Recent reports showed that most of the District was 
drought-free, with the exception of small areas in south 
Florida and coastal Louisiana where conditions were 
abnormally dry. The February forecast for Florida's or-
ange crops was unchanged from the previous month but 
remained significantly ahead of last year’s production. 
Since November, weekly cash prices were up for corn, 
soybeans, beef and broilers, while cotton and rice prices 
were down. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.frbatlanta.org/economy-matters/regional-economics 

G-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased slightly on balance in January and early February, though contacts 
expected growth to return to a modest pace over the next 6 to 12 months. Employment and business spending in-
creased slightly; manufacturing and construction and real estate activity were little changed; and consumer spending fell 
modestly. Wages rose modestly, prices rose slightly, and financial conditions improved modestly. Contacts expected 
crop incomes to be lower in 2019 than in 2018. Only a small share of contacts indicated that the government shutdown 
had hurt product demand or affected business decisions. 
Employment and Wages  
Employment increased slightly over the reporting period 
and contacts expected a similar-sized increase over the 
next 6 to 12 months. Hiring was focused on professional 
and technical, production, and sales workers. As they 
have for some time, contacts indicated that the labor 
market was tight and that they had difficulty filling posi-
tions at all skill levels. A staffing firm that primarily sup-
plies manufacturers with production workers reported 
continued difficulty in filling orders and a small decline in 
billable hours. A number of manufacturing contacts 
noted that a slowdown in demand had reduced their 
reliance on overtime and lessened the urgency of filling 
open positions. Wage growth remained modest overall. 
Contacts were most likely to report wage increases for 
managerial, professional and technical, and production 
workers. Many firms reported growing benefits costs. 
Prices 
Prices rose slightly in January and early February, 
though contacts expected price increases to pick up to a 
modest rate over the next 6 to 12 months. Retail prices 
were little changed. Producer prices rose modestly, 
reflecting in part the pass-through of higher labor, materi-
als, and freight costs.   
 
 
 
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending fell modestly over the reporting 
period. Nonauto retail sales decreased modestly, with 
declines in the furniture, appliances, apparel, and home 
improvement sectors outweighing increases in the hard-
ware, lawn and garden, and personal services catego-
ries. Numerous contacts attributed slower sales to the 
harsh winter weather that occurred over the reporting 
period. Light vehicle sales also fell. Dealers believed that 
bad weather played a role in the decline and noted some 
improvement in early February compared with January, 
though some also expressed concern about underlying 
weakness in demand. 
Business Spending 
Business spending increased slightly in January and 
early February. Retail contacts said that inventories were 
generally at comfortable levels, though some auto deal-
ers reported elevated inventories. Most manufacturers 
indicated that stocks were at comfortable levels, though 
heavy-duty truck inventories were low. Capital spending 
increased slightly, with contacts expecting somewhat 
faster growth over the next 6 to 12 months. Outlays were 
primarily for replacing industrial and IT equipment and 
for renovating structures. Energy demand from commer-
cial and industrial users was little changed. Demand for 
transportation services was flat, but remained at a strong 
level. 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

G-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago   
Construction and Real Estate 
Construction and real estate activity was little changed 
over the reporting period. Residential real estate activity 
slowed some, held back by tight inventories for lower-
priced homes and reduced demand for higher-priced 
homes. One contact noted that while entry-level invento-
ries remained tight, they had risen for the first time in 
four years. Investor demand for multifamily properties 
remained strong. Home prices and rents edged higher. 
Nonresidential construction was unchanged on balance, 
though one contact noted a pickup in bidding activity. 
Contacts indicated that shortages of materials and work-
ers were leading to delays in completing projects. Com-
mercial real estate activity was also unchanged, with 
growth in demand for industrial space offset by declines 
in demand for big box retail and office space. Contacts 
noted that in many areas the availability of industrial 
space was quite limited. Rents and the overall availability 
of sublease space were flat. Vacancy rates edged high-
er. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing production was little changed in January 
and early February, though contacts were generally 
pleased with the level of activity. Demand for steel in-
creased, but at a slower rate than in most of 2018. 
Growth in heavy machinery demand was also slower 
than a year ago, but remained solid across major selling 
sectors. Heavy truck production was little changed but 
continued at a strong pace, and one contact noted that 
large backlogs suggested the level of output would be 
sustained through much of 2019. Specialty metals manu-
facturers reported slight increases in order books, high-
lighting growth in the medical devices, aerospace, and 
defense sectors. Auto production declined slightly, but 
remained at a solid level. 
Banking and Finance 
Financial conditions improved modestly over the report-
ing period. Market participants noted a decline in volatili-
ty and rising equities prices. Business loan demand rose 
slightly, led by increased lending to the manufacturing 
and food and beverage sectors. Loan quality was little 
changed, though one contact noted increased delinquen-
cies among retailers. Loan standards were little 
changed. Consumer loan demand decreased slightly, 
primarily because of lower home loan volumes; loan 
quality and standards were little changed. 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Prices for corn were up a bit over the reporting period, 
while soybean and wheat prices moved lower. Contacts 
expected crop incomes to be lower in 2019 compared 
with 2018, anticipating that prices will stay low and the 
harvest will be smaller than 2018’s bumper crop. They 
also thought low soybean prices would lead farmers to 
switch some fields from soybeans to corn. Contacts 
noted positive reports on trade talks between the U.S. 
and China—including news that China bought some US 
soybeans. Livestock prices increased overall, and harsh 
winter weather required extra feeding expenditures for 
animals. ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit:  
chicagofed.org/cfsbc  

H-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic conditions have been unchanged since our previous report. Labor market conditions remained tight as firms 
continued to note difficulties finding qualified workers. Wages increased at a moderate pace, and survey respondents 
reported a slight increase in prices charged to consumers. Reports on consumer spending were mixed. Manufacturing 
activity continued to improve at a moderate pace. Residential real estate contacts were relatively pessimistic compared 
with previous reports. District bankers reported a slight decrease in loan demand. Agricultural conditions declined slight-
ly, and contacts expressed concerns over rising input costs and low commodity prices. Overall, the outlook among 
contacts continued to weaken for the fourth consecutive quarter but remains slightly optimistic. On net, a slightly greater 
share of contacts expect conditions in 2019 to be better or somewhat better than in 2018.   
Employment and Wages  
Employment has grown slightly since the previous re-
porting period. On net, 11 percent of contacts reported 
that employment was higher than a year ago. Worker 
shortages continued to restrict hiring. Contacts reported 
a tight labor market for skilled jobs in construction, 
healthcare, and manufacturing. One contact in the tech 
industry noted a shortage of technical workers, citing 
difficulties finding and retaining migrant workers and 
temporary employees. Contacts also reported difficulties 
finding unskilled workers with reliable means of transpor-
tation to work. Louisville contacts in higher education 
noted that enrollments are down as the employee-
friendly labor market has led potential students to enter 
the workforce instead of pursuing a college degree. 
Wages have increased moderately since the previous 
report. On net, 40 percent of contacts reported that 
wages were higher or slightly higher than a year ago, 
and 39 percent reported that labor costs increased. 
Contacts in construction and healthcare indicated that 
the tight labor market led to pay raises. One construction 
firm reported raising base salaries for the first time in 
over a decade. Small business wages throughout the 
District grew modestly. 
 
 
Prices  
Prices have increased slightly since the previous report. 
On net, 20 percent of contacts held that consumer prices 
increased relative to last year, which is a moderately 
smaller share than three months prior. Nonlabor costs 
have increased modestly. On net, 30 percent of business 
contacts reported that nonlabor costs increased from a 
year ago. Agriculture prices generally decreased across 
the District. The prices of corn, cotton, and soybeans 
have all shown slight to modest declines since the previ-
ous report. Coal and steel prices likewise decreased 
modestly, although coal prices remained elevated com-
pared with one year ago. 
Consumer Spending  
Reports from general retailers, auto dealers, and hotel-
iers indicate mixed consumer activity since the previous 
report. January real sales tax collections increased in 
Kentucky, decreased in Missouri, and were flat in Arkan-
sas and Tennessee relative to a year ago. Retailers in 
West Tennessee reported mixed activity, and contacts in 
Missouri indicated that poor weather negatively impacted 
sales. Surveyed auto dealers were split between sales 
meeting and falling short of expectations. Multiple deal-
ers expressed concerns over higher interest rates, and 
there were reports of a shift in demand toward low-end 
vehicles. Arkansas tourism sales tax revenue was flat 
year over year. 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

H-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis   
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing activity has increased moderately since 
our previous report. Contacts reported that production, 
new orders, and capacity utilization increased in the first 
quarter relative to one year ago, and they expect this 
growth to continue into the second quarter. Survey-
based indexes also indicated that Arkansas and Missouri 
manufacturing activity continued to expand from Decem-
ber to January. Several firms announced plans to ex-
pand facilities and hire new employees, including manu-
facturers in the automotive and furniture industries. 
However, a Memphis medicine manufacturer announced 
plans to lay off workers by mid-March. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the services sector has modestly improved 
since the previous report. Local contacts indicated that 
sales midway through the first quarter met or exceeded 
expectations. On net, 20 percent of contacts reported 
higher dollar sales than a year ago, and 35 percent 
predicted continuing improvement over the next quarter. 
Posted vacancies for nonfinancial service jobs increased 
across Louisville, Memphis, and St. Louis from Decem-
ber to January. Major transportation firms in the District 
announced plans to expand full-time and part-time hiring.    
Real Estate and Construction 
Residential real estate activity has declined slightly since 
the previous report. On net, 10 percent of respondents 
reported a decrease in demand for single-family homes 
compared with a year ago, and about two-thirds of con-
tacts noted that first-quarter sales have fallen short of 
expectations. Contacts continued to report inventory 
shortages.  
Residential construction activity was flat. Contacts re-
ported no change in construction activity relative to the 
same time last year. About 10 percent of contacts, on 
net, expect activity to increase in the second quarter.  
Commercial real estate activity was mixed. Survey re-
spondents reported an increase in demand for industrial 
space year over year but no change in the demand for 
office buildings and a decrease in demand for retail 
properties. These contacts expect demand for office and 
industrial space to increase in the next quarter and the 
demand for retail properties to continue to decline.  
Commercial construction activity improved slightly. Con-
tacts reported increased demand for construction of 
office and retail property types. One respondent noted 
that labor shortages are slowing down project construc-
tion schedules. Memphis area contacts reported that 
some companies are choosing to renovate existing 
facilities rather than build new ones. 
Banking and Finance 
Banking conditions in the District have weakened slightly 
since the previous report. Demand for commercial and 
industry loans decreased relative to a year ago, while 
demand for mortgages was flat. Bankers expect no 
change to overall loan demand in the second quarter. 
Credit standards were generally flat compared with year-
ago levels but continued to tighten for commercial and 
industrial loans. Delinquencies fell on a year-over-year 
basis but are expected to remain unchanged in the sec-
ond quarter. 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
District agriculture conditions declined slightly from the 
previous reporting period. The number of acres of winter 
wheat planted this season decreased slightly from last 
year’s total. Local agriculture contacts continued to ex-
press pessimism about the industry in the near term as 
low commodity prices and rising input costs strain farm 
incomes.  
Natural resource extraction conditions declined modestly 
from December to January, with seasonally adjusted 
coal production falling 6 percent. January production 
increased nearly 5 percent from a year ago.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions, visit: 
https://research.stlouisfed.org/regecon/ 

I-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Ninth District economy grew modestly overall since the last report. Employment grew slightly, hampered by tight 
labor and some signs of weakness. Wage and price pressures were moderate. The District economy showed growth in 
services, manufacturing, residential construction, commercial real estate, energy, and mining. However, consumer 
spending and commercial construction were mixed, and agriculture remained weak.  
Employment and Wages 
Employment rose slightly overall since the last report, 
with some signs of weakness. Recent job postings data 
(December or January, depending on the state) were 
mixed among District states compared with a year 
earlier. North Dakota and Montana both saw healthy 
increases in job postings, but declines were seen in 
Minnesota, South Dakota, and the Upper Peninsula of 
Michigan. Several January polls of Minnesota 
businesses by the Minneapolis Fed generally found solid 
hiring demand. A poll of large employers found moderate 
hiring at in-state operations, yet more aggressive hiring 
at operations outside the state. Labor markets continued 
to be tight. Initial unemployment insurance (UI) claims 
fell in most District states during the first five weeks of 
2019 compared with the same period a year earlier; 
Minnesota was an exception, seeing a 3 percent 
increase. Continuing UI claims fell 13 percent across 
District states over this period. There were also some 
signs of employment weakness. A Minneapolis-St. Paul 
staffing contact saw job orders and total hours in 
December and January fall by the “high single digits.” 
Two major retailers announced plans to close dozens of 
stores across the District by this spring. And an eastern 
North Dakota manufacturer announced that it will close a 
facility, affecting 300 workers, though a contact there 
said most workers “should be able to find employment 
elsewhere.” 
Wage pressures rose moderately. A Minnesota staffing 
contact noted that there was “still a lot of wage 
pressure,” estimating that wages had risen 5 percent 
over the past year. Recent polls by the Minneapolis Fed 
found that annual wage increases continued to average 
around 3 percent, with variations higher and lower 
depending on sector and geography. For example, 
average wage increases reported by South Dakota 
retailers were lower than those of Minnesota 
construction firms. However, five polls each revealed 
expectations that wages for the coming year would rise 
at a slightly slower rate than the previous year.   
Prices  
Price pressures were moderate overall since the last 
report, but input costs increased faster than overall 
prices. Nearly a third of respondents to a recent survey 
of large firms reported input price increases of more than 
3 percent from a year ago, while a slightly larger share 
reported increases of 2 percent to 3 percent. The pace of 
increase in steel prices stabilized recently, according to 
contacts in manufacturing and utilities. Retail fuel prices 
in District states as of mid-February increased slightly 
from the previous reporting period but remained 
substantially lower than their level a year earlier; natural 
gas prices remained elevated. Prices received by 
farmers for corn, wheat, and hay increased in November 
compared with a year earlier; prices for soybeans, milk, 
eggs, hogs, cattle, and turkeys decreased.  
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

I-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending was mixed since the last report. A 
vehicle dealership with multiple locations in the District 
said total sales of both new and used vehicles were 
lower in January compared with a year earlier. A District 
contact noted that RV sales saw a slowdown in the 
second half of 2018 and that he anticipated “2019 being 
down again” by roughly 5 percent due to higher interest 
rates and higher unit costs. Sales and other consumer 
taxes in North Dakota were notably higher in December, 
but flat in January compared with a year earlier. A poll of 
South Dakota retailers showed flat sales in the fourth 
quarter compared with a year earlier, with only slightly 
higher expectations for the first half of 2019. However, 
District airports generally showed higher enplanements 
in January; in Bozeman, Mont., January passengers 
rose 20 percent over a year earlier, and car rentals were 
also higher. The ski season in northwestern Montana 
was “going really well,” according to a local source, and 
lodging sales taxes across the state were higher in 
January compared with a year earlier. Minnesota hotels 
saw an up-and-down performance. December 
occupancy and revenue per available room rose slightly, 
but January figures declined.  
Services 
Activity in the services sector increased briskly. Contacts 
in banking and financial services generally described 
conditions as strong, with bullish sentiment among 
corporate clients. Demand for loans was strong even as 
the cost of credit was increasing. Rail freight demand 
was solid, according to industry sources. Domestic 
shipments on the Great Lakes nearly doubled in January 
relative to a year earlier; total volume for the season was 
up 4 percent.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Commercial construction was mixed since the last 
report. An industry database showed that the cumulative 
value of construction starts in December rose across the 
District compared with the same period a year earlier; 
however, January values declined slightly, possibly 
influenced by extreme weather. A Minnesota source 
noted that the pace of projects was moderating, but 
added, “That’s not a bad thing” given the previous pace. 
He also noted that the rising pace of construction costs 
created “a shrinking pool of projects that make economic 
sense.” Residential construction was slightly higher 
across the District; a modest increase was seen in 
Minneapolis-St. Paul in January compared with a year 
earlier, while Billings, Mont., and Rochester and St. 
Cloud (Minn.) saw small declines. 
Commercial real estate grew moderately since the last 
report. Industrial property vacancies remained low in the 
Minneapolis-St. Paul region despite significant new 
construction, and average price per square foot 
remained healthy. Office vacancy rates in the region 
were stable at somewhat elevated levels. Multifamily 
vacancy rates have stayed low throughout much of the 
region, while new construction continued. Retail 
vacancies have risen in many District markets, as major 
bankruptcies continued to roll through the chain-retail 
industry. Residential real estate was widely lower. 
January home sales registered a decline across most of 
the District’s larger cities, with a number seeing double-
digit drops compared with a year earlier.  
Manufacturing 
District manufacturing activity increased modestly since 
the last report. An index of manufacturing conditions 
indicated increased activity in January compared with a 
month earlier in Minnesota and South Dakota; the index 
for North Dakota indicated flat to slightly decreased 
activity. Two small firms began expansions at facilities in 
Minnesota. In contrast, a supplier of capital equipment 
reported that customers were cutting back on 
investments. A filtration plant in Minnesota announced 
that it was cutting around 100 workers.    
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources 
District agricultural conditions were stable at low levels. 
Crop production estimates indicated that 2018 was a 
strong year throughout the District, with new records in 
some states. However, producers continued to struggle 
with low commodity prices and expressed concerns 
about the effects of trade tensions. Respondents to the 
Minneapolis Fed’s fourth-quarter (January) survey of 
agricultural credit conditions indicated that farm income 
and capital spending decreased relative to a year earlier, 
with further declines expected for the coming three 
months. Oil and gas drilling in North Dakota and 
Montana as of mid-February increased from a month 
earlier. District iron ore mines continued to operate at 
near capacity. ■ 

J-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Tenth District economic activity expanded slightly in late January and February, and contacts expected additional gains 
in the months ahead. Consumer spending expanded slightly, led by modest gains in the auto and tourism sectors. Man-
ufacturing activity also grew at a slight pace despite a decline in new orders for exports. Sales rose in the professional 
and high-tech, transportation, and wholesale trade sectors, and contacts expected additional gains moving forward. 
Commercial real estate activity continued to rise slightly, while residential real estate activity declined further. Conditions 
in the energy sector held steady since the previous survey period, and contacts were optimistic that OPEC production 
cuts and recent commodity price increases would boost overall activity in the coming months. Farm income continued to 
decline slightly, although farmland values remained relatively steady. Bankers reported a modest decline in loan de-
mand, but loan quality, credit standards and deposit levels were stable. Overall employment and employee hours held 
steady across the District, although conditions were mixed across sectors. Wages continued to rise at a modest pace, 
with additional gains expected moving forward. Input and selling prices rose further, led by higher prices in the retail 
sector. 
Employment and Wages  
Overall District employment and employee hours held 
steady in late January and February, and respondents 
projected slight gains in the months ahead. Contacts in 
the wholesale trade, real estate, health services, restau-
rant, and tourism sectors noted steady-to-modestly 
higher levels of employment, while those in the retail 
trade, auto sales, transportation, and professional and 
high-tech services noted a decline. Employee hours 
were mixed across sectors since the previous survey, 
but hours in all sectors were steady-to-modestly higher 
than year-ago levels.  
A majority of respondents continued to report labor 
shortages for low- and medium-skill workers, including 
positions for truck drivers, all retail store positions, skilled 
technicians, and specialty-trade construction workers. A 
few contacts also noted shortages for high-skilled posi-
tions such as those in information technology, engineer-
ing, and finance. Wages continued to expand at a mod-
est pace since the previous survey period and were 
strongly above year-ago levels. Additional modest wage 
gains were projected for the months ahead.    
Prices  
Contacts in a majority of sectors reported rising input 
and selling prices, with overall input prices up moderate-
ly and selling prices up modestly. In addition, contacts 
expected prices to increase further in the months ahead. 
Input prices in the retail sector grew at a strong pace 
since the last survey, while input prices in the restaurant 
sector rose modestly. Contacts in both sectors noted 
steady selling prices and expected growth of input prices 
to continue to outpace that of selling prices moving for-
ward. Input prices in the construction supply sector fell 
since the previous survey period, while transportation 
respondents noted steady input prices. Both sectors 
reported moderately higher input prices over year-ago 
levels. Manufacturers reported a modest increase in the 
prices of finished products and raw materials, and both 
were projected to expand further in the coming months.     
Consumer Spending 
Consumer spending expanded slightly compared to the 
previous survey, and contacts expected modest gains in 
the months ahead. Retail sales increased slightly in late 
January and February and were moderately above year-
ago levels. Respondents expected retail sales to in-
crease modestly in the next few months. Auto sales grew 
modestly since the last survey period as well as com-
pared to year-ago levels. SUVs and trucks sold well, 
while sedans sold poorly. Auto contacts expected strong 
increases in capital spending in the months ahead de-
spite many contacts noting increases in the cost of cred-
it. Restaurant sales rose slightly, and contacts expected 
sales to increase in the coming months. Tourism activity 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

J-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City   
increased modestly compared to the previous survey 
period, and contacts anticipated slight sales increases in 
the months ahead. 
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity  
Manufacturing activity grew slightly since the previous 
survey period, and business contacts in wholesale trade, 
transportation, and professional and high-tech sectors 
also reported rising sales. Factory activity increased at 
both durable and nondurable goods plants, with faster 
growth at durable goods plants due primarily to increas-
es in electrical equipment and appliances, and furniture 
manufacturing. Production, shipments, and new orders 
each ticked down compared to the previous survey 
period, but remained above year-ago levels. Contacts 
reported slightly lower new orders for exports compared 
to both the previous survey period and year-ago levels. 
Outside of manufacturing, firms in the wholesale trade 
and professional and high-tech sectors experienced 
moderate growth in sales, while sales rose slightly at 
transportation firms compared to the previous survey 
period. In the coming months, wholesale trade, transpor-
tation, and professional and high-tech contacts anticipat-
ed moderate sales growth.     
Real Estate and Construction  
District real estate activity remained mixed as residential 
real estate activity declined modestly while commercial 
real estate activity rose slightly. However, contacts in 
both commercial and residential real estate projected 
gains in the months ahead. Residential home sales fell 
at a modest pace in late January and February, although 
they remained moderately above year-ago levels. Resi-
dential inventories held steady, and selling prices rose 
moderately. Residential home sales, inventories, and 
prices were expected to rise in the coming months. 
Sales of low- and medium-priced homes continued to 
outpace sales of higher-priced homes. Residential con-
struction activity declined modestly including fewer hous-
ing starts, less potential buyer traffic, and lower construc-
tion supply sales. Respondents in the residential con-
struction sector expected activity to rise in the months 
ahead. Commercial real estate activity continued to 
expand slightly as sales and absorption rose, and vacan-
cy rates declined slightly. Commercial real estate con-
tacts expected a similar pace of growth moving forward. 
 
 
 
       
Banking 
Bankers reported a modest decrease in overall loan 
demand including moderate decreases in the demand 
for commercial real estate loans, and slight-to-modest 
decreases in the demand for commercial and industrial 
loans, residential real estate loans, consumer install-
ment, and agricultural loans. Loan quality remained 
unchanged compared to a year ago, but bankers ex-
pected a modest decline in loan quality over the next six 
months. Credit standards also remained largely un-
changed in all major loan categories, and deposit levels 
were stable.    
Energy 
District energy activity was generally steady compared 
with the previous survey period. The number of active oil 
rigs fell across the District, primarily in Oklahoma and 
Kansas, and the natural gas rig count was also down 
slightly. However, production of oil and natural gas re-
mained at high levels, and overall rig productivity contin-
ued to improve. Regional energy firms expected the 
expansion of LNG pipeline capacity later this year to help 
accommodate increased production. Oil prices rose 
modestly after dropping in late 2018, but remained below 
year-ago levels. Additional OPEC production cuts and 
price increases have buoyed expectations among Dis-
trict contacts for future energy activity.     
Agriculture 
Farm income continued to decline slightly, but farmland 
values remained relatively stable in the Tenth District. 
Farm income decreased throughout the region in the last 
survey period according to District representatives, but 
modest increases in both crop and livestock prices could 
improve revenues for some farm operations moving 
forward. Demand for agricultural loans remained strong, 
and contacts reported a slight reduction in funding avail-
ability. Additionally, repayment rates on agricultural loans 
slowed modestly, and interest rates on farm loans in-
creased slightly. Despite persistent weaknesses in farm 
finances and higher interest rates, farmland values re-
mained relatively stable. However, a majority of contacts 
expected farmland values to decline moderately in 2019. 
However, District contacts indicated that demand for 
farmland remained high, and the volume of farmland 
sales compared to last year increased modestly in Ne-
braska and Kansas.  ■ 
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.KansasCityFed.org/Research/RegionalEconomy 

K-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Summary of Economic Activity 
The Eleventh District economy expanded at a moderate pace. Activity in the manufacturing, housing, and nonfinancial 
services sectors improved. Loan volumes ticked up, and retail sales grew modestly. Abundant soil moisture boosted 
outlooks in the agricultural sector. Drilling activity declined. Employment expanded moderately, despite a tight labor 
market. Wage growth remained elevated, while price growth eased. Outlooks improved; however, some contacts report-
ed weaker-than-expected output/revenue growth over the reporting period and mentioned factors such as tariffs, slower 
activity in the energy sector, increased uncertainty, weaker global economy, and labor constraints.  
Employment and Wages  
Employment grew moderately during the reporting peri-
od. A lack of qualified candidates continued to challenge 
businesses across sectors and skill levels, but shortages 
remained most severe for mid-skilled positions such as 
nurse aides, heavy equipment technicians, auto me-
chanics, construction personnel, and factory floor work-
ers. There were multiple mentions of restaurant worker 
shortages, and one commercial landscape management 
firm said they were looking to fill 75-100 entry-level 
positions. 
Wage pressures generally remained elevated. One 
staffing firm noted that employers were especially willing 
to raise wages for jobs paying less than $15 per hour. A 
durable goods manufacturer said raising starting hourly 
pay by at least 15 percent had helped draw in more and 
better-qualified applicants. 
Looking ahead, firms were bullish on their hiring plans. 
Forty-eight percent of the 384 firms responding to sup-
plemental questions in the February Texas Business 
Outlook Surveys said they expect to increase their em-
ployment over the next six to twelve months while only 8 
percent said they expected to decrease jobs. 
Prices 
Input price growth moderated, particularly in the retail 
sector. Homebuilders generally cited stable material 
costs, but lower fuel prices were mentioned by transpor-
tation service contacts. Selling price growth was slight in 
the construction and manufacturing sectors but moder-
ate in service-providing industries. Passing on cost in-
creases to customers was becoming more difficult, and 
contacts from various industries mentioned that margins 
continued to be under pressure from high costs and/or 
increased competition. Conversely, two staffing firms 
said they were able to raise bill rates as planned. 
Manufacturing  
Overall output growth improved slightly during the report-
ing period, led by an increase in fabricated metals and 
transportation equipment manufacturing. Outlooks 
among manufacturers improved compared with the 
previous reporting period, but trade issues, labor con-
straints, the rising cost of credit, and political uncertainty 
were cited as factors damping outlooks. 
Gulf Coast refinery operating rates remained healthy in 
January, but contacts said that an oversupplied gasoline 
market will drive utilization rates lower. Outlooks were 
less optimistic, with demand growth projected to be soft, 
particularly in Mexico—a major export market.  
Retail Sales 
Reports on retail spending were mixed, though overall, 
sales expanded modestly. Some retailers noted a slight 
uptick in sales activity following the end of the govern-
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

K-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas   
ment shutdown. By contrast, others said unfavorable 
weather conditions and a higher cost of credit slowed 
sales. Growth in online sales was softer than in the last 
reporting period, and auto sales weakened. Outlooks 
improved slightly, although two contacts said that any 
new auto-related tariffs would hurt future sales and/or 
business activity. 
Nonfinancial Services 
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector accelerated in 
the reporting period. The increase was widespread and 
led by growth in the professional, scientific and technical 
services sector. Demand for staffing services strength-
ened after a deceleration in activity at yearend 2018, and 
growth was broad-based geographically and across 
industries. Revenues rose in the health care and admin-
istrative support services industries. Reports from trans-
portation services firms were mixed, with rail shipments 
down year over year, but air and sea cargo volumes up 
significantly over the same period. Airlines, accommoda-
tion, and food services firms saw slower activity in the 
earlier part of the reporting period partly because of the 
government shutdown, but demand/revenues in both 
industries have firmed up since then.  
Uncertainty continued to cloud many contacts’ outlooks 
in the service sector, and trade policy issues with China 
and Brexit were cited as significant potential headwinds.  
Construction and Real Estate 
Activity in the housing market improved. Contacts noted 
an uptick in traffic and new home sales since the start of 
the year, following a slowdown at yearend 2018. Builders 
remained selective in signing new deals, and housing 
starts were expected to be relatively flat in 2019. Out-
looks were more optimistic than in the last report, though 
a few contacts said it was too early to tell whether the 
recent uptick would translate into a good spring market.  
Conditions were stable in the apartment market, and the 
expectation was for rent growth to remain solid in Austin 
and Fort Worth and to firm up in Houston. Industrial 
activity generally remained solid, and reports on the 
office market indicated that leasing was most active for 
new or recently renovated class A space.   
Financial Services 
Loan volumes increased slightly over the reporting peri-
od, led by higher commercial real estate lending. Con-
sumer lending ticked up, which one contact attributed to 
loan requests from workers affected by the recent gov-
ernment shutdown. Commercial and industrial and resi-
dential real estate loan volumes dipped. Loan pricing 
remained competitive, while deposit volumes declined 
notably. Outlooks were slightly more optimistic than they 
were six weeks ago; however, bankers remained con-
cerned about the lending impact of uncertainty in U.S. 
and global markets.    
Energy 
Drilling activity in the Eleventh District slowed, with the 
rig count declining during the reporting period. Availabil-
ity of additional pipeline capacity in the Permian Basin, 
as early as the end of February, pushed up crude oil 
prices in West Texas relative to the Gulf Coast. Firms 
were more conservative in their capital spending plans 
than in the last report, with most noting that they had 
revised down their capital budgets based on WTI crude 
priced between $50 and $55. Contacts noted significant-
ly higher uncertainty stemming from U.S.-Iran and U.S.-
Venezuela policies, softening global demand, and trepi-
dation about OPEC’s willingness to maintain production 
cuts. 
Agriculture 
Prospects for 2019 crops heading into the spring plant-
ing season were strong thanks to favorable soil moisture 
conditions. Producers were behind in field preparation 
work because of soil saturation, with planting expected 
to be delayed in some regions. Overall, contacts expect 
average to above-average crop yields this year but noted 
the financial situation of many producers continued to be 
a concern due to generally low crop prices. On the live-
stock side, grazing conditions were looking better this 
year than last and beef demand remained strong. ■  
For more information about District economic conditions visit: 
www.dallasfed.org/research/texas 

L-1 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Summary of Economic Activity 
Economic activity in the Twelfth District continued to expand at a moderate pace during the reporting period of January 
through mid-February. Conditions in the labor market remained tight, and wage growth was moderate. Price inflation 
was unchanged. Sales of retail goods expanded modestly, while activity in consumer and business services was strong. 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened moderately, and conditions in agriculture deteriorated modestly. 
On balance, contacts reported that residential and commercial real estate market activity expanded moderately. Overall 
lending activity was flat. 
 
 
Employment and Wages  
Conditions in the labor market remained tight, with per-
sistent worker shortages reported across many indus-
tries and skill levels. Hiring picked up moderately on 
balance. Employment at a large San Francisco software 
and consulting company grew notably as demand for its 
services increased. A cattle ranching company in Arizo-
na also increased employment to meet growing demand. 
In the Mountain West, a regional bank noted that its 
hiring was limited only by a shortage of qualified labor. 
The bank hoped to be able to increase employment 
further when it expands its lending business later this 
year. A steel manufacturer in Oregon reported that hiring 
activity was flat. A fruit grower in the Pacific Northwest 
noted that weaker profit potential stemming from lower 
market prices resulted in excess labor capacity in the 
industry and could lead to layoffs. 
Wage growth continued to increase moderately across 
most sectors due to continued brisk labor demand 
amidst persistent shortages of qualified workers. Con-
tacts emphasized that wage growth was especially no-
ticeable for higher-skilled workers. Demand for high-
skilled warehouse workers and truck drivers picked up in 
the Mountain West, resulting in wage pressures. Em-
ployers continued to raise starting salaries for most 
information technology and cybersecurity positions. A 
community bank in Central California enhanced its bo-
nus structure and increased its retirement benefits to 
better retain and attract experienced loan officers.     
Prices  
Overall, price inflation was unchanged over the reporting 
period. A contact in Seattle noted somewhat higher 
prices at grocery stores and restaurants due to the ro-
bust local economy. A contact in the California utility 
sector observed modest upward pricing pressures for 
electricity rates due mainly to higher financing costs 
following recent wildfires. A contact in Central California 
saw slightly higher crop prices, due in part to lower in-
ventories, while elsewhere in the District, pricing pres-
sures for fruit and dairy remained subdued. A contact in 
the Mountain West observed that fuel prices fell further. 
Lumber prices were stable, but at a noticeably lower 
level than last year, and contacts in California and Ore-
gon reported that price inflation of other building materi-
als was weak.            
Retail Trade and Services 
Sales of retail goods expanded modestly. Contacts in the 
Mountain West reported that retail sales activity beat 
expectations for a moderation following the holiday sea-
son and against the backdrop of the government shut-
down. A contact in the home goods retail sector in Arizo-
na noted solid sales activity. One contact in the Mountain 
West reported that retailers are attentive to ongoing 
trade negotiations, as certain product supply chains 
depend on inputs from China and could be negatively 
The Beige Book ■ February 2019 

L-2 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   
impacted if no resolution is reached in the coming 
months.  
Activity in the consumer and business services sectors 
was strong. Demand for software products and consult-
ing services expanded solidly in Northern California, and 
one contact noted that, with IPO activity expected to pick 
up in the coming year, the outlook for most technology 
consulting and financial services businesses was opti-
mistic. A major shipping and logistics business reported 
plans to increase investment in automation to meet 
growing consumer and business demand more efficient-
ly.  
Manufacturing 
Conditions in the manufacturing sector strengthened 
moderately overall. A steel manufacturer in Oregon 
noted strong activity in the industry due to lower competi-
tion from abroad arising from trade policy actions. A 
contact in Northern California reported that activity in the 
semiconductor industry continued on solid footing. Deliv-
eries of commercial aircraft were flat from the same 
period last year, while new orders increased significantly. 
A contact in the Pacific Northwest observed that activity 
at sawmills ticked down, due in part to poor weather 
affecting raw material deliveries and slower growth in the 
national housing market. The outlook in the manufac-
tured lumber sector was for solid building activity as 
weather conditions improve.    
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries  
Conditions in the agriculture sector deteriorated modest-
ly. Many contacts continued to cite trade policy changes 
as a source of weaker sales abroad and general uncer-
tainty, though factors such as a stronger dollar and the 
moderation in the housing market also played a role. A 
contact in Eastern Washington observed that demand 
from China for fruit crops declined, and a contact in 
California noted that walnut exports declined. A raw 
lumber producer in Oregon reported that sales were 
significantly lower on a year-over-year basis, due to 
moderating construction activity and lower demand from 
China. Oversupply in dairy markets persisted, hurting 
profitability and forcing some producers in the Mountain 
West to exit the market. In Idaho, profitability at beef 
producers picked up, though it was still below levels 
seen a year ago. A California contact noted that the 
outlooks for crop yields and inventories improved further 
after rainfall beat expectations over the reporting period.     
Real Estate and Construction 
Real estate markets expanded moderately on balance. 
While most contacts continued to acknowledge slower 
activity over the past several months, they did not notice 
any significant deterioration over the reporting period. 
Contacts in the Pacific Northwest and Mountain West 
generally noted stable to slightly improved residential 
construction activity. A contact in Oregon reported a 
modest increase in building and selling activity due in 
part to lower mortgage rates, though a few other con-
tacts observed a slight decline in building activity in 
some areas due to softer demand. A contact in Central 
California observed tepid selling activity, while contacts 
in Southern California and Idaho saw solid demand 
supporting still-elevated home prices. Contacts generally 
noted that residential inventories and time-on-market 
had risen slightly but were still low by historical stand-
ards.  
In the commercial real estate market, contacts reported 
stable construction activity. Contacts in the Pacific North-
west generally noted that construction activity has not 
deviated noticeably from its solid trend. However, in 
Oregon, a contact observed that building activity was 
down slightly on a year-over-year basis. A contact in 
Central California saw commercial leasing and sales 
activity slow modestly.     
Financial Institutions  
Lending activity was generally flat over the reporting 
period. A contact at a national small business lending 
service based in California reported that loan demand 
significantly beat expectations. However, contacts in the 
Mountain West noted that while most business borrow-
ers renewed loans at existing levels, a few reduced 
credit lines due to lower demand for their products.  
Contacts at community banks in Oregon and Central 
California noted that loan growth slowed slightly, while 
competition between lenders was brisk. Most contacts 
reported that credit quality remained healthy. However, a 
contact in the Mountain West reported that the balance 
sheets of dairy producers weakened as profitability de-
clined in that market. ■ 


